<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Foreword • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<section id="foreword">
<header>
  <h2>Foreword</h2>
  <p>To the first American edition</p>
</header>
<p>
	<span class="first-words">Man</span> seems to be entering one of the major crises of his career.
	His whole future, nay the possibility of his having any future at all, depends on the turn which events may take in the next half-century.
	It is a commonplace that he is coming into possession of new and dangerous instruments for controlling his environment and his own nature.
	Perhaps it is less obvious that he is also groping toward a new view of his office in the scheme of things, and toward a new and racial purpose.
	Unfortunately he may possibly take too long to learn what it is that he really wants to do with himself.
	Before he can gain clear insight, he may lose himself in a vast desert of spiritual aridity, or even blunder into physical self-destruction.
	Nothing can save him but a new vision, and a consequent new order of sanity, or common sense.
</p>
<p>
	America may play an important part in creating the new vision.
	But visions, if they are to be permanently helpful, must embody the whole breadth and depth of experience.
	They must not be crude, extravagant, lop-sided.
	They must be conceived not only with originality but with sanity, even if sanity has to take up a new orientation in consequence of the new vision.
</p>
<p>
	In early chapters of this book America is given a not very attractive part.
	I have imagined the triumph of the cruder sort of Americanism over all that is best and most promising in American culture.
	May this not occur in the real world!
	But since the possibility of such an issue is admitted even by many Americans themselves, I shall, I hope be forgiven for emphasizing it, and using it as an early turning point in the long drama of Man.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
