<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅠⅩ–2: The Ruin of Two Worlds • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-09-2" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 2<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Ruin of Two Worlds</span>
</h3>
<p>
	Rather more than fifty thousand years after their first appearance, the Martians secured a permanent footing on the Antarctic table-land and over-ran Australasia and South Africa.
	For many centuries they remained in possession of a large part of the earth’s surface, practising a kind of agriculture, studying terrestrial conditions, and spending much energy on the “liberation” of diamonds.
</p>
<p>
	During the considerable period before their settlement their mentality had scarcely changed; but actual habitation of the earth now began to undermine their self-complacency and their unity.
	It was borne in upon certain exploring Martians that the terrestrial bipeds, though insensitive to radiation, were actually the intelligences of the planet.
	At first this fact was studiously shunned, but little by little it gripped the attention of all terrestrial Martians.
	At the same time they began to realize that the whole work of research into terrestrial conditions, and even the social construction of their colony, depended, not on the public mind, but on private individuals, acting in their private capacity.
	The colonial super-individual inspired only the diamond crusade, and the attempt to extirpate the terrestrial intelligence, or radiation.
	These various novel acts of insight woke the Martian colonists from an age-long dream.
	They saw that their revered super-individual was scarcely more than the least common measure of themselves, a bundle of atavistic fantasies and cravings, knit into one mind and gifted with a certain practical cunning.
	A rapid and bewildering spiritual renascence now came over the whole Martian colony.
	The central doctrine of it was that what was valuable in the Martian species was not radiation but mentality.
	These two utterly different things had been confused, and even identified, since the dawn of Martian civilization.
	At last they were clearly distinguished.
	A fumbling but sincere study of mind now began; and distinction was even made between the humbler and loftier mental activities.
</p>
<p>
	There is no telling whither this renascence might have led, had it run its course.
	Possibly in time the Martians might have recognized worth even in minds other than Martian minds.
	But such a leap was at first far beyond them.
	Though they now understood that human animals were conscious and intelligent, they regarded them with no sympathy, rather indeed, with increased hostility.
	They still rendered allegiance to the Martian race, or brotherhood, just because it was in a sense one flesh, and, indeed, one mind.
	For they were concerned not to abolish but to recreate the public mind of the colony, and even that of Mars itself.
</p>
<p>
	But the colonial public mind still largely dominated them in their more somnolent periods, and actually sent some of those who, in their private phases, were revolutionaries across to Mars for help against the revolutionary movement.
	The home planet was quite untouched by the new ideas.
	Its citizens co-operated whole-heartedly in an attempt to bring the colonists to their senses.
	But in vain.
	The colonial public mind itself changed its character as the centuries passed, until it became seriously alienated from Martian orthodoxy.
	Presently, indeed, it began to undergo a very strange and thorough metamorphosis, from which, conceivably, it might have emerged as the noblest inhabitant of the solar system.
	Little by little it fell into a kind of hypnotic trance.
	That is to say, it ceased to possess the attention of its private members, yet remained as a unity of their subconscious, or un-noticed mentality.
	Radiational unity of the colony was maintained, but only in this subconscious manner; and it was at that depth that the great metamorphosis began to take place under the fertilizing influence of the new ideas; which, so to speak, were generated in the tempest of the fully conscious mental revolution, and kept on spreading down into the oceanic depth of the subconsciousness.
	Such a condition was likely to produce in time the emergence of a qualitatively new and finer mentality, and to waken at last into a fully conscious superindividual of higher order than its own members.
	But meanwhile this trance of the public consciousness incapacitated the colony for that prompt and co-ordinated action which had been the most successful faculty of Martian life.
	The public mind of the home planet easily destroyed its disorderly offspring, and set about re-colonizing the earth.
</p>
<p>
	Several times during the next three hundred thousand years this process repeated itself.
	The changeless and terribly efficient super-individual of Mars extirpated its own offspring on the earth, before it could emerge from the chrysalis.
	And the tragedy might have been repeated indefinitely, but for certain changes that took place in humanity.
</p>
<p>
	The first few centuries after the foundation of the Martian colony had been spent in ceaseless war.
	But at last, with terribly reduced resources, the Second Men had reconciled themselves to the fact that they must live in the same world with their mysterious enemy.
	Moreover, constant observation of the Martians began to restore somewhat man’s shattered self-confidence.
	For during the fifty thousand years before the Martian colony was founded his opinion of himself had been undermined.
	He had formerly been used to regarding himself as the sun’s ablest child.
	Then suddenly a stupendous new phenomenon had defeated his intelligence.
	Slowly he had learned that he was at grips with a determined and versatile rival, and that this rival hailed from a despised planet.
	Slowly he had been forced to suspect that he himself was outclassed, outshone, by a race whose very physique was incomprehensible to man.
	But after the Martians had established a permanent colony, human scientists began to discover the real physiological nature of the Martian organism, and were comforted to find that it did not make nonsense of human science.
	Man also learned that the Martians, though very able in certain spheres, were not really of a high mental type.
	These discoveries restored human self-confidence.
	Man settled down to make the best of the situation.
	Impassable barriers of high-power electric current were devised to keep the Martians out of human territory, and men began patiently to rebuild their ruined home as best they could.
	At first there was little respite from the crusading zeal of the Martians, but in the second millennium this began to abate, and the two races left one another alone, save for occasional revivals of Martain fervour.
	Human civilization was at last reconstructed and consolidated, though upon a modest scale.
	Once more, though interrupted now and again by decades of agony, human beings lived in peace and relative prosperity.
	Life was somewhat harder than formerly, and the physique of the race was definitely less reliable than of old; but men and women still enjoyed conditions which most nations of the earlier species would have envied.
	The age of ceaseless personal sacrifice in service of the stricken community had ended at last.
	Once more a wonderful diversity of untrammelled personalities was put forth.
	Once more the minds of men and women were devoted without hindrance to the joy of skilled work, and all the subtleties of personal intercourse.
	Once more the passionate interest in one’s fellows, which had for so long been hushed under the all-dominating public calamity, refreshed and enlarged the mind.
	Once more there was music, sweet and backward-hearkening towards a golden past.
	Once more a wealth of literature, and of the visual arts.
	Once more intellectual exploration into the nature of the physical world and the potentiality of mind.
	And once more the religious experience, which had for so long been coarsened and obscured by all the violent distractions and inevitable self-deceptions of war, seemed to be refining itself under the influence of reawakened culture.
</p>
<p>
	In such circumstances the earlier and less sensitive human species might well have prospered indefinitely.
	Not so the Second Men.
	For their very refinement of sensibility made them incapable of shunning an ever-present conviction that in spite of all their prosperity they were undermined.
	Though superficially they seemed to be making a slow but heroic recovery they were at the same time suffering from a still slower and far more profound spiritual decline.
	Generation succeeded generation.
	Society became almost perfected, within its limited territory and its limitations of material wealth.
	The capacities of personality were developed with extreme subtlety and richness.
	At last the race proposed to itself once more its ancient project of remaking human nature upon a loftier plane.
	But somehow it had no longer the courage and self-respect for such work.
	And so, though there was much talk, nothing was done.
	Epoch succeeded epoch, and everything human remained apparently the same.
	Like a twig that has been broken but not broken off, man settled down to retain his life and culture, but could make no progress.
</p>
<p>
	It is almost impossible to describe in a few words the subtle malady of the spirit that was undermining the Second Men.
	To say that they were suffering from an inferiority complex, would not be wholly false, but it would be a misleading vulgarization of the truth.
	To say that they had lost faith, both in themselves and in the universe, would be almost as inadequate.
	Crudely stated, their trouble was that, as a species, they had attempted a certain spiritual feat beyond the scope of their still-primitive flature.
	Spiritually they had over-reached themselves, broken every muscle (so to speak) and incapacitated themselves for any further effort.
	For they had determined to see their own racial tragedy as a thing of beauty, and they had failed.
	It was the obscure sense of this defeat that had poisoned them, for, being in many respects a very noble species, they could not simply turn their backs upon their failure and pursue the old way of life with the accustomed zest and thoroughness.
</p>
<p>
	During the earliest Martian raids, the spiritual leaders of humanity had preached that the disaster must be an occasion for a supreme religious experience.
	While striving mightily to save their civilization, men must yet (so it was said) learn not merely to endure, but to admire, even the sternest issue.
	“Thus and thus is the world.
	Seeing the depth, we shall see also the height, and praise both.”
	The whole population had accepted this advice.
	At first they had seemed to succeed.
	Many noble literary expressions were given forth, which seemed to define and elaborate, and even actually to create in men’s hearts, this supreme experience.
	But as the centuries passed and the disasters were repeated, men began to fear that their forefathers had deceived themselves.
	Those remote generations had earnestly longed to feel the racial tragedy as a factor in the cosmic beauty; and at last they had persuaded themselves that this experience had actually befallen them.
	But their descendants were slowly coming to suspect that no such experience had ever occurred, that it would never occur to any man, and that there was in fact no such cosmic beauty to be experienced.
	The First Men would probably, in such a situation, have swung violently either into spiritual nihilism, or else into some comforting religious myth.
	At any rate, they were of too coarse-grained a nature to be ruined by a trouble so impalpable.
	Not so the Second Men.
	For they realized all too clearly that they were faced with the supreme crux of existence.
	And so, age after age the generations clung desperately to the hope that, if only they could endure a little longer, the light would break in on them.
	Even after the Martian colony had been three times established and destroyed by the orthodox race in Mars, the supreme preoccupation of the human species was with this religious crux.
	But afterwards, and very gradually, they lost heart.
	For it was borne in on them that either they themselves were by nature too obtuse to perceive this ultimate excellence of things (an excellence which they had strong reason to believe in intellectually, although they could not actually experience it), or the human race had utterly deceived itself, and the course of cosmic events after all was not significant, but a meaningless rigmarole.
</p>
<p>
	It was this dilemma that poisoned them.
	Had they been still physically in their prime, they might have found fortitude to accept it, and proceed to the patient exfoliation of such very real excellencies as they were still capable of creating.
	But they had lost the vitality which alone could perform such acts of spiritual abnegation.
	All the wealth of personality, all the intricacies of personal relationship, all the complex enterprise of a very great community, all art, all intellectual research, had lost their savour.
	It is remarkable that a purely religious disaster should have warped even the delight of lovers in one another’s bodies, actually taken the flavour out of food, and drawn a veil between the sun-bather and the sun.
	But individuals of this species, unlike their predecessors, were so closely integrated, that none of their functions could remain healthy while the highest was disordered.
	Moreover, the general slight failure of physique, which was the legacy of age-long war, had resulted in a recurrence of those shattering brain disorders which had dogged the earliest races of their species.
	The very horror of the prospect of racial insanity increased their aberration from reasonableness.
	Little by little, shocking perversions of desire began to terrify them.
	Masochistic and sadistic orgies alternated with phases of extravagant and ghastly revelry.
	Acts of treason against the community, hitherto almost unknown, at last necessitated a strict police system.
	Local groups organized predatory raids against one another.
	Nations appeared, and all the phobias that make up nationalism.
</p>
<p>
	The Martian colonists, when they observed man’s disorganization, prepared, at the instigation of the home planet, a very great offensive.
	It so happened that at this time the colony was going through its phase of enlightenment, which had always hitherto been followed sooner or later by chastisement from Mars.
	Many individuals were at the moment actually toying with the idea of seeking harmony with man, rather than war.
	But the public mind of Mars, outraged by this treason, sought to overwhelm it by instituting a new crusade.
	Man’s disunion offered a great opportunity.
</p>
<p>
	The first attack produced a remarkable change in the human race.
	Their madness seemed suddenly to leave them.
	Within a few weeks the national governments had surrendered their sovereignty to a central authority.
	Disorders, debauchery, perversions, wholly ceased.
	The treachery and self-seeking and corruption, which had by now been customary for many centuries, suddenly gave place to universal and perfect devotion to the social cause.
	The species was apparently once more in its right mind.
	Everywhere, in spite of the war’s horrors, there was gay brotherliness, combined with a heroism, which clothed itself in an odd extravagance of jocularity.
</p>
<p>
	The war went ill for man.
	The general mood changed to cold resolution.
	And still victory was with the Martians.
	Under the influence of the huge fanatical armies which were poured in from the home planet, the colonists had shed their tentative pacifism, and sought to vindicate their loyality by ruthlessness.
	In reply the human race deserted its sanity, and succumbed to an uncontrollable lust for destruction.
	It was at this stage that a human bacteriologist announced that he had bred a virus of peculiar deadliness and transmissibility, with which it would be possible to infect the enemy, but at the cost of annihilating also the human race.
	It is significant of the insane condition of the human population at this time that, when these facts were announced and broadcast, there was no discussion of the desirability of using this weapon.
	It was immediately put in action, the whole human race applauding.
</p>
<p>
	Within a few months the Martian colony had vanished, their home planet itself had received the infection, and its population was already aware that nothing could save it.
	Man’s constitution was tougher than that of the animate clouds, and he appeared to be doomed to a somewhat more lingering death.
	He made no effort to save himself, either from the disease which he himself had propagated, or from the pulmonary plague which was caused by the disintegrated substance of the dead Martian colony.
	All the public processes of civilization began to fall to pieces; for the community was paralysed by disillusion, and by the expectation of death.
	Like a bee-hive that has no queen, the whole population of the earth sank into apathy.
	Men and women stayed in their homes, idling, eating whatever food they could procure, sleeping far into the mornings, and, when at last they rose, listlessly avoiding one another.
	Only the children could still be gay, and even they were oppressed by their elders’ gloom.
	Meanwhile the disease was spreading.
	Household after household was stricken, and was left unaided by its neighbours.
	But the pain in each individual’s flesh was strangely numbed by his more poignant distress in the spiritual defeat of the race.
	For such was the high development of this species, that even physical agony could not distract it from the racial failure.
	No one wanted to save himself; and each knew that his neighbours desired not his aid.
	Only the children, when the disease crippled them, were plunged into agony and terror.
	Tenderly, yet listlessly, their elders would then give them the last sleep.
	Meanwhile the unburied dead spread corruption among the dying.
	Cities fell still and silent.
	The corn was not harvested.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
