<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅤⅠⅠⅠ–4: Delusions of the Martians • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-08-4" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 4<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">Delusions of the Martians</span>
</h3>
<p>
	To understand how the Martians tricked themselves, and how they were finally undone by their own insane will, we must glance at their history.
</p>
<p>
	The civilized Martians constituted the sole remaining variety of a species.
	That species itself, in the remote past, had competed with, and exterminated, many other species of the same general type.
	Aided by the changing climate, it had also exterminated almost all the species of the more terrestrial kind of fauna, and had thereby much reduced the vegetation which it was subsequently to need and foster so carefully.
	This victory of the species had been due partly to its versatility and intelligence, partly to a remarkable zest in ferocity, partly to its unique powers of radiation and sensitivity to radiation, which enabled it to act with a co-ordination impossible even to the most gregarious of animals.
	But, as with other species in biological history, the capacity by which it triumphed became at length a source of weakness.
	When the species reached a stage corresponding to primitive human culture, one of its races, achieving a still higher degree of radiant intercourse and physical unity, was able to behave as a single vital unit; and so it succeeded in exterminating all its rivals.
	Racial conflict had persisted for many thousands of years, but as soon as the favoured race had developed this almost absolute solidarity of will, its victory was sweeping, and was clinched by joyous massacre of the enemy.
</p>
<p>
	But ever afterwards the Martians suffered from the psychological effects of their victory at the close of the epoch of racial wars.
	The extreme brutality with which the other races had been exterminated conflicted with the generous impulses which civilization had begun to foster, and left a scar upon the conscience of the victors.
	In self-defence they persuaded themselves that since they were so much more admirable than the rest, the extermination was actually a sacred duty.
	And their unique value, they said, consisted in their unique radiational development.
	Hence arose a gravely insincere tradition and culture, which finally ruined the species.
	They had long believed that the physical basis of consciousness must necessarily be a system of units directly sensitive to ethereal vibrations, and that organisms dependent on the physical contact of their parts were too gross to have any experience whatever.
	After the age of the racial massacres they sought to persuade themselves that the excellence, or ethical worth, of any organism depended upon the degree of complexity and unity of its radiation.
	Century by century they strengthened their faith in this vulgar doctrine, and developed also a system of quite irrational delusions and obsessions based upon an obsessive and passionate lust in radiation.
</p>
<p>
	It would take too long to tell of all these subsidiary fantasies, and of the ingenious ways in which they were reconciled with the main body of sane knowledge.
	But one at least must be mentioned, because of the part it played in the struggle with man.
	The Martians knew, of course, that “solid matter” was solid by virtue of the interlocking of the minute electro-magnetic systems called atoms.
	Now rigidity had for them somewhat the same significance and prestige that air, breath, spirit, had for early man.
	It was in the quasi-solid form that Martians were physically most potent; and the maintenance of this form was exhausting and difficult.
	These facts combined in the Martian consciousness with the knowledge that rigidity was after all the outcome of interlocked electro-magnetic systems.
	Rigidity was thus endowed with a peculiar sanctity.
	The superstition was gradually consolidated, by a series of psychological accidents, into a fanatical admiration of all very rigid materials, but especially of hard crystals, and above all of diamonds.
	For diamonds were extravagantly resistant; and at the same time, as the Martians themselves put it, diamonds were superb jugglers with the ethereal radiation called light.
	Every diamond was therefore a supreme embodiment of the tense energy and eternal equilibrium of the cosmos, and must be treated with reverence.
	In Mars, all known diamonds were exposed to sunlight on the pinnacles of sacred buildings; and the thought that on the neighbour planet might be diamonds which were not properly treated, was one motive of the invasion.
</p>
<p>
	Thus did the Martian mind, unwittingly side-tracked from its true development, fall sick, and strive ever more fanaticafly toward mere phantoms of its goal.
	In the early stages of the disorder, radiation was merely regarded as an infallible <em>sign</em> of mentality, and radiative complexity was taken as an infallible <em>measure</em>, merely, of spiritual worth.
	But little by little, radiation and mentality failed to be distinguished, and radiative organization was actually mistaken for spiritual worth.
</p>
<p>
	In this obsession the Martians resembled somewhat the First Men during their degenerate phase of servitude to the idea of movement; but with a difference.
	For the Martian intelligence was still active, though its products were severely censored in the name of the “spirit of the race.”
	Every Martian was a case of dual personality.
	Not merely was he sometimes a private consciousness, sometimes the consciousness of the race, but further, even as a private individual he was in a manner divided against himself.
	Though his practical allegiance to the super-individual was absolute, so that he condemned or ignored all thoughts and impulses that could not be assimilated to the public consciousness, he did in fact have such thoughts and impulses, as it were in the deepest recesses of his being.
	He very seldom noticed that he was having them, and whenever he did notice it, he was shocked and terrified; yet he did have them.
	They constituted an intermittent, sometimes almost a continuous, critical commentary on all his more reputable experience.
</p>
<p>
	This was the great tragedy of the spirit on Mars.
	The Martians were in many ways extremely well equipped for mental progress and for true spiritual adventure, but through a trick of fortune which had persuaded them to prize above all else unity and uniformity, they were driven to thwart their own struggling spirits at every turn.
</p>
<p>
	Far from being superior to the private mind, the public mind which obsessed every Martian was in many ways actually inferior.
	It had come into dominance in a crisis which demanded severe military coordination; and though, since that remote age, it had made great intellectual progress, it remained at heart a military mind.
	Its disposition was something between that of a field-marshal and the God of the ancient Hebrews.
	A certain English philosopher once described and praised the fictitious corporate personality of the state, and named it “Leviathan.”
	The Martian super-individual was Leviathan endowed with consciousness.
	In this consciousness there was nothing hut what was easily assimilated and in accord with tradition.
	Thus the public mind was always intellectually and culturally behind the times.
	Only in respect of practical social organization did it keep abreast of its own individuals.
	Intellectual progress had always been initiated by private individuals, and had only penetrated the public mind when the mass of individuals had been privately infected by intercourse with the pioneers.
	The public consciousness itself initiated progress only in the sphere of social, military, and economic organization.
</p>
<p>
	The novel circumstances which were encountered on the earth put the mentality of the Martians to a supreme test.
	For the unique enterprise of tackling a new world demanded the extremes of both public and private activity, and so led to agonizing conflicts within each private mind.
	For, while the undertaking was essentially social and even military, and necessitated very strict co-ordination and unity of action, the extreme novelty of the new environment demanded all the resources of the untrammelled private consciousness.
	Moreover the Martians encountered much on the earth which made nonsense of their fundamental assumptions.
	And in their brightest moments of private consciousness they sometimes recognized this fact.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
