<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅠⅤ–5: Downfall • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-04-5" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 5<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">Downfall</span>
</h3>
<p>
	The collapse of this first world-civilization was due to the sudden failure of the supplies of coal.
	All the original fields had been sapped centuries earlier, and it should have been obvious that those more recently discovered could not last for ever.
	For some thousands of years the main supply had come from Antarctica.
	So prolific was this continent that latterly a superstition had arisen in the clouded minds of the world-citizens that it was in some mysterious manner inexhaustible.
	Thus when at last, in spite of strict censorship, the news began to leak out that even the deepest possible borings had failed to reveal further vegetable deposits of any kind, the world was at first incredulous.
</p>
<p>
	The sane policy would have been to abolish the huge expense of power on ritual flying, which used more of the community’s resources than the whole of productive industry.
	But to believers in Gordelpus such a course was almost unthinkable.
	Moreover it would have undermined the flying aristocracy.
	This powerful class now declared that the time had come for the release of the secret of divine power, and called on the S.O.S. to inaugurate the new era.
	Vociferous agitation in all lands put the scientists in an awkward plight.
	They gained time by declaring that, though the moment of revelation was approaching, it had not yet arrived; for they had received a divine intimation that this failure of coal was imposed as a supreme test of man’s faith.
	The service of Gordelpus in ritual flight must be rather increased than reduced.
	Spending a bare mimimum of its power on secular matters, the race must concentrate upon religion.
	When Gordelpus had evidence of their devotion and trust, he would permit the scientists to save them.
</p>
<p>
	Such was the prestige of science that at first this explanation was universally accepted.
	The ritual flights were maintained.
	All luxury trades were abolished, and even vital services were reduced to a minimum.
	Workers thus thrown out of employment were turned over to agricultural labour; for it was felt that the use of mechanical power in mere tillage must be as soon as possible abolished.
	These changes demanded far more organizing ability than was left in the race.
	Confusion was widespread, save here and there where serious organization was attempted by certain Jews.
</p>
<p>
	The first result of this great movement of economy and self-denial was to cause something of a spiritual awakening among many who had formerly lived a life of bored ease.
	This was augmented by the widespread sense of crisis and impending marvels.
	Religion, which, in spite of its universal authority in this age, had become a matter of ritual rather than of inward experience, began to stir in many hearts, – not indeed as a movement of true worship, but rather as a vague awe, not unmixed with self-importance.
</p>
<p>
	But as the novelty of this enthusiasm dwindled, and life became increasingly uncomfortable, even the most zealous began to notice with horror that in moments of inactivity they were prone to doubts too shocking to confess.
	And as the situation worsened, even a life of ceaseless action could not suppress these wicked fantasies.
</p>
<p>
	For the race was now entering upon an unprecedented psychological crisis, brought about by the impact of the economic disaster upon a permanently unwholesome mentality.
	Each individual, it must be remembered, had once been a questioning child, but had been taught to shun curiosity as the breath of Satan.
	Consequently the whole race was suffering from a kind of inverted repression, a repression of the intellective impulses.
	The sudden economic change, which affected all classes throughout the planet, thrust into the focus of attention a shocking curiosity, an obsessive scepticism, which had hitherto been buried in the deepest recesses of the mind.
</p>
<p>
	It is not easy to conceive the strange mental disorder that now afflicted the whole race, symbolizing itself in some cases by fits of actual physical vertigo.
	After centuries of prosperity, of routine, of orthodoxy, men were suddenly possessed by a doubt which they regarded as diabolical.
	No one said a word of it; but in each man’s own mind the fiend raised a whispering head, and each was haunted by the troubled eyes of his fellows.
	Indeed the whole changed circumstances of his life jibed at his credulity.
</p>
<p>
	Earlier in the career of the race, this world crisis might have served to wake men into sanity.
	Under the first pressure of distress they might have abandoned the extravagances of their culture.
	But by now the ancient way of life was too deeply rooted.
	Consequently, we observe the fantastic spectacle of a world engaged, devotedly and even heroically, on squandering its resources in vast aeronautical displays, not through single-minded faith in their rightness and efficacy, but solely in a kind of desperate automatism.
	Like those little rodents whose migration became barred by an encroachment of the sea, so that annually they drowned themselves in thousands, the First Men helplessly continued in their ritualistic behaviour; but unlike the lemmings, they were human enough to be at the same time oppressed by unbelief, an unbelief which, moreover, they dared not recognize.
</p>
<p>
	Meanwhile the scientists were earnestly and secretly delving in the ancient literature of their science, in hope of discovering the forgotten talisman.
	They undertook also clandestine experiments, but upon a false trail laid by the wily English contemporary of the Discoverer.
	The main results were, that several researchers were poisoned or electrocuted, and a great college was blown up.
	This event impressed the populace, who supposed the accident to be due to an overdaring exercise of the divine potency.
	The misunderstanding inspired the desperate scientists to rig further impressive “miracles,” and moreover to use them to dispel the increasing restlessness of hungry industrial workers.
	Thus when a deputation arrived outside the offices of Cosmopolitan Agriculture to demand more flour for industrialists, Gordelpus miraculously blew up the ground on which they stood, and flung their bodies among the onlookers.
	When the agriculturists of China struck to obtain a reasonable allowance of electric power for their tillage, Gordelpus affected them with an evil atmosphere, so that they choked and died in thousands.
	Stimulated in this manner by direct divine intervention, the doubting and disloyal elements of the world population recovered their faith and their docility.
	And so the world jogged on for a while, as nearly as possible as it had done for the last four thousand years, save for a general increase of hunger and ill-health.
</p>
<p>
	But inevitably, as the conditions of life became more and more severe, docility gave place to desperation.
	Daring spirits began publicly to question the wisdom, and even the piety, of so vast an expenditure of power upon ritual flight, when prime necessities such as food and clothing were becoming so scarce.
	Did not this helpless devotion merely ridicule them in the divine eyes?
	God helps him who helps himself.
	Already the death rate had risen alarmingly.
	Emaciated and ragged persons were beginning to beg in public places.
	In certain districts whole populations were starving, and the Directorate did nothing for them.
	Yet, elsewhere, harvests were being wasted for lack of power to reap them.
	In all lands an angry clamour arose for the inauguration of the new era.
</p>
<p>
	The scientists were by now panic-stricken.
	Nothing had come of their researches, and it was evident that in future all wind- and water-power must be devoted to the primary industries.
	Even so, there was starvation ahead for many.
	The President of the Physical Society suggested to the Directorate that ritual flying should at once be reduced by half as a compromise with Gordelpus.
	Immediately the hideous truth, which few hitherto had dared to admit even to themselves, was blurted out upon the ether by a prominent Jew: the whole hoary legend of the divine secret was a lie, else why were the physicists temporizing?
	Dismay and rage spread over the planet.
	Everywhere the people rose against the scientists, amid against the governing authority which they controlled.
	Massacres and measures of retaliation soon developed into civil wars.
	China and India declared themselves free national states, but could not achieve internal unity.
	In America, ever a stronghold of science and religion, the Government maintained its authority for a while; but as its seat became less secure, its methods became more ruthless.
	Finally it made the mistake of using not merely poison gas, but microbes; and such was the decayed state of medical science that no one could invent a means of restraining their ravages.
	The whole American continent succumbed to a plague of pulmonary and nervous diseases.
	The ancient “American Madness,” which long ago had been used against China, now devastated America.
	The great stations of water-power and wind-power were wrecked by lunatic mobs who sought vengeance upon anything associated with authority.
	Whole populations vanished in an orgy of cannibalism.
</p>
<p>
	In Asia and Africa, some semblance of order was maintained for a while.
	Presently, however, the American Madness spread to these continents also, and very soon all living traces of their civilization vanished.
</p>
<p>
	Only in the most natural fertile areas of the world could the diseased remnant of a population now scrape a living from the soil.
	Elsewhere, utter desolation.
	With easy strides the jungle came hack into its own.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
