<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter Ⅴ–3: The Cult of Youth • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-05-3" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 3<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Cult of Youth</span>
</h3>
<p>
	The Patagonians passed through all the spiritual phases that earlier races had experienced, but in a distinctive manner.
	They had their primitive tribal religion, derived from the dark past, and based on the fear of natural forces.
	They had their monotheistic impersonation of Power as a vindictive Creator.
	Their most adored racial hero was a god-man who abolished the old religion of fear.
	They had their phases, also, of devout ritual and their phases of rationalism, and again their phases of empirical curiosity.
</p>
<p>
	Most significant for the historian who would understand their special mentality is the theme of the god-man; so curiously did it resemble, yet differ from, similar themes in earlier cultures of the first human species.
	He was conceived as eternally adolescent, and as mystically the son of all men and women.
	Far from being the Elder Brother, he was the Favourite Child; and indeed he epitomizes that youthful energy and enthusiasm which the race now guessed was slipping away from it.
	Though the sexual interest of this people was weak, the parental interest was curiously strong.
	But the worship of the Favourite Son was not merely parental; it expressed also both the individual’s craving for his own lost youth, and his obscure sense that the race itself was senescent.
</p>
<p>
	It was believed that the prophet had actually lived a century as a fresh adolescent.
	He was designated the Boy who Refused to Grow Up.
	And this vigour of will was possible to him, it was said, because in him the feeble vitality of the race was concentrated many millionfold.
	For he was the fruit of all parental passion that ever was and would be; and as such he was divine.
	Primarily he was the Son of Man, but also he was God.
	For God, in this religion, was no prime Creator but the fruit of man’s endeavour.
	The Creator was brute power, which had quite inadvertently begotten a being nobler than itself.
	God, the adorable, was the eternal outcome of man’s labour in time, the eternally realized promise of what man himself should become.
	Yet though this cult was based on the will for a young-hearted future, it was also overhung by a dread, almost at times a certainty, that in fact such a future would never be, that the race was doomed to grow old and die, that spirit could never conquer the corruptible flesh, but must fade and vanish.
	Only by taking to heart the message of the Divine Boy, it was said, could man hope to escape this doom.
</p>
<p>
	Such was the legend.
	It is instructive to examine the reality.
	The actual individual, in whom this myth of the Favourite Son was founded, was indeed remarkable.
	Born of shepherd parents among the Southern Andes, he had first become famous as the leader of a romantic “youth movement”; and it was this early stage of his career that won him followers.
	He urged the young to set an example to the old, to live their own life undaunted by conventions, to enjoy, to work hard but briefly, to be loyal comrades.
	Above all, he preached the religious duty of remaining young in spirit.
	No one, he said, need grow old, if he willed earnestly not to do so, if he would but keep his soul from falling asleep, his heart open to all rejuvenating influences and shut to every breath of senility.
	The delight of soul in soul, he said, was the great rejuvenator; it re-created both lover and beloved.
	If Patagonians would only appreciate each other’s beauty without jealousy, the race would grow young again.
	And the mission of his ever-increasing Band of Youth was nothing less than the rejuvenation of man.
</p>
<p>
	The propagation of this attractive gospel was favoured by a seeming miracle.
	The prophet turned out to be biologically unique among Patagonians.
	When many of his coevals were showing signs of senescence, he remained physically young.
	Also he possessed a sexual vigour which to the Patagonians seemed miraculous.
	And since sexual taboo was unknown, he exercised himself so heartily in love-making, that he had paramours in every village, and presently his offspring were numbered in hundreds.
	In this respect his followers strove hard to live up to him, though with small success.
	But it was not only physically that the prophet remained young.
	He preserved also a striking youthful agility of mind.
	His sexual prodigality, though startling to his contemporaries, was in him a temperate overflow of surplus energy.
	Far from exhausting him, it refreshed him.
	Presently, however, this exuberance gave place to a more sober life of work and meditation.
	It was in this period that he began to differentiate himself mentally from his fellows.
	For at twenty-five, when most Patagonians were deeply settled into a mental groove, he was still battling with successive waves of ideas, and striking out into the unknown.
	Not till ime was forty, and still physically in earlier prime, did he gather his strength and deliver himself of his mature gospel.
	This, his considered view of existence, turned out to be almost unintelligible to Patagonians.
	Though in a sense it was an expression of their own culture, it was an expression upon a plane of vitality to which very few of them could ever reach.
</p>
<p>
	The climax came when, during a ceremony in the supreme temple of the capital city, while the worshippers were all prostrated before the hideous image of the Creator, the ageless prophet strode up to the altar, regarded first the congregation and then the god, burst into a hearty peal of laughter, slapped the image resoundingly, and cried, “Ugly, I salute you!
	Not as almighty, but as the greatest of all jokers.
	To have such a face, and yet to be admired for it!
	To be so empty, and yet so feared!”
	Instantly there was a hubbub.
	But such was the young iconoclast’s god-like radiance, confidence, unexpectedness, and such his reputation as the miraculous Boy, that when he turned upon the crowd, they fell silent, and listened to his scolding.
</p>
<p>
	“Fools!” he cried.
	“Senile infants!
	If God really likes your adulation, and all this hugger-mugger, it is because he enjoys the joke against you, and against himself, too.
	You are too serious, yet not serious enough; too solemn, and all for puerile ends.
	You are so eager for life, that you cannot live.
	You cherish your youth so much that it flies from you.
	When I was a boy, I said, ‘Let us keep young’; and you applauded, and went about hugging your toys and refusing to grow up.
	What I said was not bad for a boy, but it was not enough.
	Now I am a man; and I say, ‘For God’s sake, grow up!’
	Of course we must keep young; but it is useless to keep young if we do not also grow up, and never stop growing up.
	To keep young, surely, is just to keep supple and keen; and to grow up is not at all a mere sinking into stiffness and into disillusion, but a rising into ever finer skill in all the actions of the game of living.
	There is something else, too, which is a part of growing up – to see that life is really, after all, a game; a terribly serious game, no doubt, but none the less a game.
	When we play a game, as it should be played, we strain every muscle to win; but all the while we care less for winning than for the game.
	And we play the better for it.
	When barbarians play against a Patagonian team, they forget that it is a game, and go mad for victory.
	And then how we despise them!
	If they find themselves losing, they turn savage; if winning, blatant.
	Either way, the game is murdered, and they cannot see that they are slaughtering a lovely thing.
	How they pester and curse the umpire, too!
	I have done that myself, of course, before now; not in games but in life.
	I have actually cursed the umpire of life.
	Better so, anyhow, than to insult him with presents, in the hope of being favoured; which is what you are doing here, with your salaams and your vows.
	I never did that.
	I merely hated him.
	Then later I learned to laugh at him, or rather at the thing you set up in his place.
	But now at last I see him clearly, and laugh with him, at myself, for having missed the spirit of the game.
	But as for you! Coming here to fawn and whine and cadge favours of the umpire!”
</p>
<p>
	At this point the people rushed toward him to seize him.
	But he checked them with a young laugh that made them love while they hated.
	He spoke again.
</p>
<p>
	“I want to tell you how I came to learn my lesson.
	I have a queer love for clambering about the high mountains; and once when I was up among the snow-fields and precipices of Aconcagua, I was caught in a blizzard.
	Perhaps some of you may know what storms can be like in the mountains.
	The air became a hurtling flood of snow.
	I was swallowed up and carried away.
	After many hours of floundering, I fell into a snow-drift.
	I tried to rise, but fell again and again, till my head was buried.
	The thought of death enraged me, for there was still so much that I wanted to do.
	I struggled frantically, vainly.
	Then suddenly – how can I put it? – I saw the game that I was losing, and it was good.
	Good, no less to lose than to win.
	For it was the game, now, not victory, that mattered.
	Hitherto I had been blindfold, and a slave to victory; suddenly I was free, and with sight.
	For now I saw myself, and all of us, through the eyes of the umpire.
	It was as though a play-actor were to see the whole play, with his own part in it, through the author’s eyes, from the auditorium.
	Here was I, acting the part of a rather fine man who had come to grief through his own carelessness before his work was done.
	For me, a character in the play, the situation was hideous; yet for me, the spectator, it had become excellent, within a wider excellence.
	I saw that it was equally so with all of us, and with all the worlds.
	For I seemed to see a thousand worlds taking part with us in the great show.
	And I saw everything through the calm eyes, the exultant, almost derisive, yet not unkindly, eyes of the playwright.
</p>
<p>
	“Well, it had seemed that my exit had come; but no, there was still a cue for me.
	Somehow I was so strengthened by this new view of things that I struggled out of the snow-drift.
	And here I am once more.
	But I am a new man.
	My spirit is free.
	While I was a boy, I said, ‘Grow more alive’; but in those days I never guessed that there was an aliveness far intenser than youth’s flicker, a kind of still incandescence.
	Is there no one here who knows what I mean?
	No one who at least <em>desires</em> this keener living?
	The first step is to outgrow this adulation of life itself, and this cadging obsequiousness toward Power.
	Come!
	Put it away!
	Break the ridiculous image in your hearts, as I now smash this idol.”
</p>
<p>
	So saying he picked up a great candlestick and shattered the image.
	Once more there was an uproar, and the temple authorities had him arrested.
	Not long afterwards he was tried for sacrilege and executed.
	For this final extravagance was but the climax of many indiscretions, and those in power were glad to have so obvious a pretext for extinguishing this brilliant but dangerous lunatic.
</p>
<p>
	But the cult of the Divine Boy had already become very popular, for the earlier teaching of the prophet expressed the fundamental craving of the Patagonians.
	Even his last and perplexing message was accepted by his followers, though without real understanding.
	Emphasis was laid upon the act of iconoclasm, rather than upon the spirit of his exhortation.
</p>
<p>
	Century by century, the new religion, for such it was, spread over the civilized world.
	And the race seemed to have been spiritually rejuvenated to some extent by widespread fervour.
	Physically also a certain rejuvenation took place; for before his death this unique biological “sport,” or throw-back to an earlier vitality, produced some thousands of sons and daughters; and they in turn propagated the good seed far and wide.
	Undoubtedly it was this new strain that brought about the golden age of Patagonia, greatly improving the material conditions of the race, carrying civilization into the northern continents and attacking problems of science and philosophy with renewed ardour.
</p>
<p>
	But the revival was not permanent.
	The descendants of the prophet prided themselves too much on violent living.
	Physically, sexually, mentally, they over-reached themselves and became enfeebled.
	Moreover, little by little the potent strain was diluted and overwhelmed by intercourse with the greater volume of the innately “senile”; so that, after a few centuries, the race returned to its middle-aged mood.
	At the same time the vision of the Divine Boy was gradually distorted.
	At first it had been youth’s ideal of what youth should be, a pattern woven of fanatical loyalty, irresponsible gaiety, comradeship, physical gusto, and not a little pure devilry.
	But insensibly it became a pattern of that which was expected of youth by sad maturity.
	The violent young hero was sentimentalized into the senior’s vision of childhood, naïve and docile.
	All that had been violent was forgotten; and what was left became a whimsical and appealing stimulus to the parental impulses.
	At the same time this phantom was credited with all the sobriety and caution which are so easily appreciated by the middle-aged.
</p>
<p>
	Inevitably this distorted image of youth became an incubus upon the actual young men and women of the race.
	It was held up as the model social virtue; but it was a model to which they could never conform without doing violence to their best nature, since it was not any longer an expression of youth at all.
	Just as, in an earlier age, women had been idealized and at the same time hobbled, so now, youth.
</p>
<p>
	Some few, indeed, throughout the history of Patagonia, attained a clearer vision of the prophet.
	Fewer still were able to enter into the spirit of his final message, in which his enduring youthfulness raised him to a maturity alien to Patagonia.
	For the tragedy of this people was not so much their “senescence” as their arrested growth.
	Feeling themselves old, they yearned to be young again.
	But, through fixed immaturity of mind, they could never recognize that the true, though unlooked-for, fulfilment of youth’s passionate craving is not the mere achievement of the ends of youth itself, but an advance into a more awake and far-seeing vitality.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
