<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter Ⅴ–4: The Catastrophe • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-05-4" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 4<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Catastrophe</span>
</h3>
<p>
	It was in these latter days that the Patagonians discovered the civilization that had preceded them.
	In rejecting the ancient religion of fear, they had abandoned also the legend of a remote magnificence, and had come to regard themselves as pioneers of the mind.
	In the new continent which was their homeland there were, of course, no relics of the ancient order; and the ruins that besprinkled the older regions had been explained as mere freaks of nature.
	But latterly, with the advance of natural knowledge, archæologists had reconstructed something of the forgotten world.
	And the crisis came when, in the basement of a shattered pylon in China, they found a store of metal plates (constructed of an immensely durable artificial element), on which were embossed crowded lines of writing.
	These objects were, in fact, blocks from which books were printed a thousand centuries earlier.
	Other deposits were soon discovered, and bit by bit the dead language was deciphered.
	Within three centuries the outline of the ancient culture was laid bare; and presently the whole history of man’s rise and ruin fell upon this latter-day civilization with crushing effect, as though an ancient pylon were to have fallen on a village of wigwams at its foot.
	The pioneers discovered that all the ground which they had so painfully won from the wild had been conquered long ago, and lost; that on the material side their glory was nothing beside the glory of the past; and that in the sphere of mind they had established only a few scattered settlements where formerly was an empire.
	The Patagonian system of natural knowledge had been scarcely further advanced than that of preNewtonian Europe.
	They had done little more than conceive the scientific spirit and unlearn a few superstitions.
	And now suddenly they came into a vast inheritance of thought.
</p>
<p>
	This in itself was a gravely disturbing experience for a people of strong intellectual interest.
	But even more overwhelming was the discovery, borne in on them in the course of their research, that the past had been not only brilliant but crazy, and that in the long run the crazy element had completely triumphed.
	For the Patagonian mind was by now too sane and empirical to accept the ancient knowledge without testing it.
	The findings of the archæologists were handed over to the physicists and other scientists, and the firm thought and valuation of Europe and America at their zenith were soon distinguished from the degenerate products of the World State.
</p>
<p>
	The upshot of this impact with a more developed civilization was dramatic and tragic.
	It divided the Patagonians into loyalists and rebels, into those who clung to the view that the new learning was a satanic lie, and those who faced the facts.
	To the former party the facts were thoroughly depressing; the latter, though overawed, found in them a compelling majesty, and also a hope.
	That the earth was a mote among the star-clouds was the least subversive of the new doctrines, for the Patagonians had already abandoned the geocentric view.
	What was so distressing to the reactionaries was the theory that an earlier race had long ago possessed and spent the vitality that they themselves so craved.
	The party of progress, on the other hand, urged that this vast new knowledge must be used; and that, thus equipped, Patagonia might compensate for lack of youthfulness by superior sanity.
</p>
<p>
	This divergence of will resulted in a physical conflict such as had never before occurred in the Patagonian world.
	Something like nationalism emerged.
	The more vigorous Antarctic coasts became modern, while Patagonia itself clung to the older culture.
	There were several wars, but as physics and chemistry advanced in Antarctica, the Southerners were able to devise engines of war which the Northerners could not resist.
	In a couple of centuries the new “culture” had triumphed.
	The world was once more unified.
</p>
<p>
	Hitherto Patagonian civilization had been of a mediæval type.
	Under the influence of physics and chemistry it began to change.
	Wind- and water-power began to be used for the generation of electricity.
	Vast mining operations were undertaken in search of the metals and other minerals which no longer occurred at easy depths.
	Architecture began to make use of steel.
	Electrically driven aeroplanes were made, but without real success.
	And this failure was symptomatic; for the Patagonians were not sufficiently foolhardy to master aviation, even had their planes been more efficient.
	They themselves naturally attributed their failure wholly to lack of a convenient source of power, such as the ancient petrol.
	Indeed this lack of oil and coal hampered them at every turn.
	Volcanic power, of course, was available; but, never having been really mastered by the more resourceful ancients, it defeated the Patagonians completely.
</p>
<p>
	As a matter of fact, in wind and water they had all that was needed.
	The resources of the whole planet were available, and the world population was less than a hundred million.
	With this source alone they could never, indeed, have competed in luxury with the earlier World State, but they might well have achieved something like Utopia.
</p>
<p>
	But this was not to be.
	Industrialism, though accompanied by only a slow increase of population, produced in time most of the social discords which had almost ruined their predecessors.
	To them it appeared that all their troubles would be solved if only their material power were far ampler.
	This strong and scarcely rational conviction was a symptom of their ruling obsession, the craving for increased vitality.
</p>
<p>
	Under these circumstances it was natural that one event and one strand of ancient history should fascinate them.
	The secret of limitless material power had once been known and lost.
	Why should not Patagonians rediscover it, and use it, with their superior sanity, to bring heaven on earth?
	The ancients, no doubt, did well to forgo this dangerous source of power; but the Patagonians, level-headed and single-minded, need have no fear.
	Some, indeed, considered it less important to seek power than to find a means of checking biological senescence; but, unfortunately, though physical science had advanced so rapidly, the more subtle biological sciences had remained backward, largely because among the ancients themselves little more had been done than to prepare their way.
	Thus it happened that the most brilliant minds of Patagonia, fascinated by the prize at stake, concentrated upon the problem of matter.
	The state encouraged this research by founding and endowing laboratories whose avowed end was this sole work.
</p>
<p>
	The problem was difficult, and the Patagonian scientists, though intelligent, were somewhat lacking in grit.
	Only after some five hundred years of intermittent research was the secret discovered, or partially so.
	It was found possible, by means of a huge initial expenditure of energy, to annihilate the positive and negative electric charges in one not very common kind of atom.
	But this limitation mattered not at all; the human race now possessed an inexhaustible source of power which could be easily manipulated and easily controlled.
	But though controllable, the new gift was not foolproof; and there was no guarantee that those who used it might not use it foolishly, or inadvertently let it get out of hand.
</p>
<p>
	Unfortunately, at the time when the new source of energy was discovered, the Patagonians were more divided than of old.
	Industrialism, combined with the innate docility of the race, had gradually brought about a class cleavage more extreme even than that of the ancient world, though a cleavage of a curiously different kind.
	The strongly parental disposition of the average Patagonian prevented the dominant class from such brutal exploitation as had formerly occurred.
	Save during the first century of industrialism, there was no serious physical suffering among the proletariat.
	A paternal government saw to it that all Patagonians were at least properly fed and clothed, that all had ample leisure and opportunities of amusement.
	At the same time they saw to it also that the populace became more and more regimented.
	As in the First World State, civil authority was once more in the hands of a small group of masters of industry, but with a difference.
	Formerly the dominant motive of big business had been an almost mystical passion for the creation of activity; now the ruling minority regarded themselves as standing towards the populace <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">in loco parentis</i>, and aimed at creating “a young-hearted people, simple, gay, vigorous and loyal.”
	Their ideal of the state was something between a preparatory school under a sympathetic but strict adult staff, and a joint-stock company, in which the shareholders retained only one function, to delegate their powers thankfully to a set of brilliant directors.
</p>
<p>
	That the system had worked so well and survived so long was due not only to innate Patagonian docility, but also to the principle by which the governing class recruited itself.
	One lesson at least had been learnt from the bad example of the earlier civilization, namely respect for intelligence.
	By a system of careful testing, the brightest children were selected from all classes and trained to be governors.
	Even the children of the governors themselves were subjected to the same examination, and only those who qualified were sent to the “schools for young governors.”
	Some corruption no doubt existed, but in the main this system worked.
	The children thus selected were very carefully trained in theory and practice, as organizers, scientists, priests and logicians.
</p>
<p>
	The less brilliant children of the race were educated very differently from the young governors.
	It was impressed on them that they were less able than the others.
	They were taught to respect the governors as superior beings, who were called upon to serve the community in specially skilled and arduous work, simply because of their ability.
	It would not be true to say that the less intelligent were educated merely to be slaves; rather they were expected to be the docile, diligent and happy sons and daughters of the fatherland.
	They were taught to be loyal and optimistic.
	They were given vocational training for their various occupations, and encouraged to use their intelligence as much as possible upon the plane suited to it; but the affairs of the state and the problems of religion and theoretical science were strictly forbidden.
	The official doctrine of the beauty of youth was fundamental in their education.
	They were taught all the conventional virtues of youth, and in particular modesty and simplicity.
	As a class they were extremely healthy, for physical training was a very important part of education in Patagonia.
	Moreover, the universal practice of sun-bathing, which was a religious rite, was especially encouraged among the proletariat, as it was believed to keep the body “young” and the mind placid.
	The leisure of the governed class was devoted mostly to athletics and other sport, physical and mental.
	Music and other forms of art were also practised, for these were considered fit occupations for juveniles.
	The government exercised a censorship over artistic products, but it was seldom enforced; for the common folk of Patagonia were mostly too phlegmatic and too busy to conceive anything but the most obvious and respectable art.
	They were fully occupied with work and pleasure.
	They suffered no sexual restraints.
	Their impersonal interests were satisfied with the official religion of youth-worship and loyalty to the community.
</p>
<p>
	This placid condition lasted for some four hundred years after the first century of industrialism.
	But as time passed the mental difference between the two classes increased.
	Superior intelligence became rarer and rarer among the proletariat; the governors were recruited more and more from their own offspring, until finally they became an hereditary caste.
	The gulf widened.
	The governors began to lose all mental contact with the governed.
	They made a mistake which could never have been committed had their psychology kept pace with their other sciences.
	Ever confronted with the workers’ lack of intelligence, they came to treat them more and more as children, and forgot that, though simple, they were grown men and women who needed to feel themselves as free partners in a great human enterprise.
	Formerly this illusion of responsibility had been sedulously encouraged.
	But as the gulf widened the proletarians were treated rather as infants than as adolescents, rather as well-cared-for domestic animals than as human beings.
	Their lives became more and more minutely, though benevolently, systematized for them.
	At the same time less care was taken to educate them up to an understanding and appreciation of the common human enterprise.
	Under these circumstances the temper of the people changed.
	Though their material condition was better than had ever been known before, save under the First World State, they became listless, discontented, mischievous, ungrateful to their superiors.
</p>
<p>
	Such was the state of affairs when the new source of energy was discovered.
	The world community consisted of two very different elements, first a small, highly intellectual caste, passionately devoted to the state and to the advancement of culture amongst themselves; and, second, a much more numerous population of rather obtuse, physically well-cared-for, and spiritually starved industrialists.
	A serious clash between the two classes had already occurred over the use of a certain drug, favoured by the people for the bliss it produced, forbidden by the governors for its evil after-effects.
	The drug was abolished; but the motive was misinterpreted by the proletariat.
	This incident brought to the surface a hate that had for long been gathering strength in the popular mind, though unwittingly.
</p>
<p>
	When rumour got afoot that in future mechanical power would be unlimited, the people expected a millennium.
	Every one would have his own limitless source of energy.
	Work would cease.
	Pleasure would be increased to infinity.
	Unfortunately the first use made of the new power was extensive mining at unheard-of depths in search of metals and other minerals which had long ago ceased to be available near the surface.
	This involved difficult and dangerous work for the miners.
	There were casualties.
	Riots occurred.
	The new power was used upon the rioters with murderous effect, the governors declaring that, though their paternal hearts bled for their foolish children, this chastisement was necessary to prevent worse evils.
	The workers were urged to face their troubles with that detachment which the Divine Boy had preached in his final phase; but this advice was greeted with the derision which it deserved.
	Further strikes, riots, assassinations.
	The proletariat had scarcely more power against their masters than sheep against the shepherd, for they had not the brains for large-scale organization.
	But it was through one of these pathetically futile rebellions that Patagonia was at last destroyed.
</p>
<p>
	A petty dispute had occurred in one of the new mines.
	The management refused to allow miners to teach their trade to their sons; for vocational education, it was said, should be carried on professionally.
	Indignation against this interference with parental authority caused a sudden flash of the old rage.
	A power unit was seized, and after a bout of insane monkeying with the machinery, the mischief-makers inadvertently got things into such a state that at last the awful djin of physical energy was able to wrench off his fetters and rage over the planet.
	The first explosion was enough to blow up the mountain range above the mine.
	In those mountains were huge tracts of the critical element, and these were detonated by rays from the initial explosion.
	This sufficed to set in action still more remote tracts of the elements.
	An incandescent hurricane spread over the whole of Patagonia, reinforcing itself with fresh atomic fury wherever it went, It raged along the line of the Andes and the Rockies, scorching both continents with its heat.
	It undermined and blew up the Behring Straits, spread like a brood of gigantic fiery serpents into Asia, Europe and Africa.
	Martians, already watching the earth as a cat a bird beyond its spring, noted that the brilliance of the neighbour planet was suddenly enhanced.
	Presently the oceans began to boil here and there with submarine commotion.
	Tidal waves mangled the coasts and floundered up the valleys.
	But in time the general sea level sank considerably through evaporation and the opening of chasms in the ocean floor.
	All volcanic regions became fantastically active.
	The polar caps began to melt, but prevented the arctic regions from being calcined like the rest of the planet.
	The atmosphere was a continuous dense cloud of moisture, fumes and dust, churned in ceaseless hurricanes.
	As the fury of the electromagnetic collapse proceeded, the surface temperature of the planet steadily increased, till only in the Arctic and a few favoured corners of the sub-Arctic could life persist.
</p>
<p>
	Patagonia’s death agony was brief.
	In Africa and Europe a few remote settlements escaped the actual track of the eruptions, but succumbed in a few weeks to the hurricanes of steam.
	Of the two hundred million members of the human race, all were burnt or roasted or suffocated within three months – all but thirty-five, who happened to be in the neighbourhood of the North Pole.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
