<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter Ⅰ–3: Europe After the Anglo–French War • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-01-3" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 3<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">Europe After the Anglo–French War</span>
</h3>
<p>
	A subtle change now began to affect the whole mental climate of the planet.
	This is remarkable, since, viewed for instance from America or China, this war was, after all, but a petty disturbance, scarcely more than a brawl between quarrelsome statelets, an episode in the decline of a senile civilization.
	Expressed in dollars, the damage was not impressive to the wealthy West and the potentially wealthy East.
	The British Empire, indeed, that unique banyan tree of peoples, was henceforward less effective in world diplomacy; but since the bond that held it together was by now wholly a bond of sentiment, the Empire was not disintegrated by the misfortune of its parent trunk.
	Indeed, a common fear of American economic imperialism was already helping the colonies to remain loyal.
</p>
<p>
	Yet this petty brawl was in fact an irreparable and far-reaching disaster.
	For in spite of those differences of temperament which had forced the English and French into conflict, they had co-operated, though often unwittingly, in tempering and clarifying the mentality of Europe.
	Though their faults played a great part in wrecking Western civilization, the virtues from which these vices sprang were needed for the salvation of a world prone to uncritical romance.
	In spite of the inveterate blindness and meanness of France in international policy, and the even more disastrous timidity of England, their influence on culture had been salutary, and was at this moment sorely needed.
	For, poles asunder in tastes and ideals, these two peoples were yet alike in being on the whole more sceptical, and in their finest individuals more capable of dispassionate yet creative intelligence, than any other Western people.
	This very character produced their distinctive faults, namely, in the English a caution that amounted often to moral cowardice, and in the French a certain myopic complacency and cunning, which masqueraded as realism.
	Within each nation there was, of course, great variety.
	English minds were of many types.
	But most were to some extent distinctively English; and hence the special character of England’s influence in the world.
	Relatively detached, sceptical, cautious, practical, more tolerant than others, because more complacent and less prone to fervour, the typical Englishman was capable both of generosity and of spite, both of heroism and of timorous or cynical abandonment of ends proclaimed as vital to the race.
	French and English alike might sin against humanity, but in different manners.
	The French sinned blindly, through a strange inability to regard France dispassionately.
	The English sinned through faint-heartedness, and with open eyes.
	Among all nations they excelled in the union of common sense and vision.
	But also among all nations they were most ready to betray their visions in the name of common sense.
	Hence their reputation for perfidy.
</p>
<p>
	Differences of national character and patriotic sentiment were not the most fundamental distinctions between men at this time.
	Although in each nation a common tradition or cultural environment imposed a certain uniformity on all its members, yet in each nation every mental type was present, though in different proportions.
	The most significant of all cultural differences between men, namely, the difference between the tribalists and the cosmopolitans, traversed the national boundaries.
	For throughout the world something like a new, cosmopolitan “nation” with a new all-embracing patriotism was beginning to appear.
	In every land there was by now a salting of awakened minds who, whatever their temperament and politics and formal faith, were at one in respect of their allegiance to humanity as a race or as an adventuring spirit.
	Unfortunately this new loyalty was still entangled with old prejudices.
	In some minds the defence of the human spirit was sincerely identified with the defence of a particular nation, conceived as the home of all enlightenment.
	In others, social injustice kindled a militant proletarian loyalty, which, though at heart cosmopolitan, infected alike its champions and its enemies with sectarian passions.
</p>
<p>
	Another sentiment, less definite and conscious than cosmopolitanism, also played some part in the minds of men, namely loyalty toward the dispassionate intelligence, and perplexed admiration of the world which it was beginning to reveal, a world august, immense, subtle, in which, seemingly, man was doomed to play a part minute but tragic.
	In many races there had, no doubt, long existed some fidelity toward the dispassionate intelligence.
	But it was England and France that excelled in this respect.
	On the other hand, even in these two nations there was much that was opposed to this allegiance.
	These, like all peoples of the age, were liable to bouts of insane emotionalism.
	Indeed the French mind, in general so clear sighted, so realistic, so contemptuous of ambiguity and mist, so detached in all its final valuations, was yet so obsessed with the idea “France” as to be wholly incapable of generosity in international affairs.
	But it was France, with England, that had chiefly inspired the intellectual integrity which was the rarest and brightest thread of Western culture, not only within the territories of these two nations, but throughout Europe and America.
	In the seventeenth and eighteenth Christian centuries, the French and English had conceived, more clearly than other peoples, an interest in the objective world for its own sake, had founded physical science, and had fashioned out of scepticism the most brilliantly constructive of mental instruments.
	At a later stage it was largely the French and English who, by means of this instrument, had revealed man and the physical universe in something like their true proportions; and it was chiefly the elect of these two peoples that had been able to exult in this bracing discovery.
</p>
<p>
	With the eclipse of France and England this great tradition of dispassionate cognizance began to wane.
	Europe was now led by Germany.
	And the Germans, in spite of their practical genius, their scholarly contributions to history, their brilliant science and austere philosophy, were at heart romantic.
	This inclination was both their strength and their weakness.
	Thereby they had been inspired to their finest art and their most profound metaphysical speculation.
	But thereby they were also often rendered un-self-critical and pompous.
	More eager than Western minds to solve the mystery of existence, less sceptical of the power of human reason, and therefore more inclined to ignore or argue away recalcitrant facts, the Germans were courageous systematizers.
	In this direction they had achieved greatly.
	Without them, European thought would have been chaotic.
	But their passion for order and for a systematic reality behind the disorderly appearances, rendered their reasoning all too often biased.
	Upon shifty foundations they balanced ingenious ladders to reach the stars.
	Thus, without constant ribald criticism from across the Rhine and the North Sea, the Teutonic soul could not achieve full self-expression.
	A vague uneasiness about its own sentimentalism and lack of detachment did indeed persuade this great people to assert its virility now and again by ludicrous acts of brfltality, and to compensate for its dream life by ceaseless hard-driven and brilliantly successful commerce; but what was needed was a far more radical self-criticism.
</p>
<p>
	Beyond Germany, Russia.
	Here was a people whose genius needed, even more than that of the Germans, discipline under the critical intelligence.
	Since the Bolshevic revolution, there had risen in the scattered towns of this immense tract of corn and forest, and still more in the metropolis, an original mode of art and thought, in which were blended a passion of iconoclasm, a vivid sensuousness, and yet also a very remarkable and essentially mystical or intuitive power of detachment from all private cravings.
	America and Western Europe were interested first in the individual human life, and only secondarily in the social whole.
	For these peoples, loyalty involved a reluctant self-sacrifice, and the ideal was ever a person, excelling in prowess of various kinds.
	Society was but the necessary matrix of this jewel.
	But the Russians, whether by an innate gift, or through the influence of agelong political tyranny, religious devotion, and a truly social revolution, were prone to self-contemptuous interest in groups, prone, indeed, to a spontaneous worship of whatever was conceived as loftier than the individual man, whether society, or God, or the blind forces of nature.
	Western Europe could reach by way of the intellect a precise conception of man’s littleness and irrelevance when regarded as an alien among the stars; could even glimpse from this standpoint the cosmic theme in which all human striving is but one contributory factor.
	But the Russian mind, whether orthodox or Tolstoyan or fanatically materialist, could attain much the same conviction intuitively, by direct perception, instead of after an arduous intellectual pilgrimage; and, reaching it, could rejoice in it.
	But because of this independence of intellect, the experience was confused, erratic, frequently misinterpreted; and its effect on conduct was rather explosive than directive.
	Great indeed was the need that the West and East of Europe should strengthen and temper one another.
</p>
<p>
	After the Bolshevic revolution a new element appeared in Russian culture, and one which had not been known before in any modern state.
	The old regime was displaced by a real proletarian government, which, though an oligarchy, and sometimes bloody and fanatical, abolished the old tyranny of class, and encouraged the humblest citizen to be proud of his partnership in the great community.
	Still more important, the native Russian disposition not to take material possessions very seriously cooperated with the political revolution, and brought about such a freedom from the snobbery of wealth as was quite foreign to the West.
	Attention which elsewhere was absorbed in the massing or display of money was in Russia largely devoted either to spontaneous instinctive enjoyments or to cultural activity.
</p>
<p>
	In fact it was among the Russian townsfolk, less cramped by tradition than other city-dwellers, that the spirit of the First Men was beginning to achieve a fresh and sincere readjustment to the facts of its changing world.
	And from the townsfolk something of the new way of life was spreading even to the peasants; while in the depths of Asia a hardy and ever-growing population looked increasingly to Russia, not only for machinery, but for ideas.
	There were times when it seemed that Russia might transform the almost universal autumn of the race into a new spring.
</p>
<p>
	After the Bolshevic revolution the New Russia had been boycotted by the West, and had therefore passed through a stage of self-conscious extravagance.
	Communism and naïve materialism became the dogmas of a new crusading atheist church.
	All criticism was suppressed, even more rigorously than was the opposite criticism in other countries; and Russians were taught to think of themselves as saviours of mankind.
	Later, however, as economic isolation began to hamper the Bolshevic state, the new culture was mellowed and broadened.
	Bit by bit, economic intercourse with the West was restored, and with it cultural intercourse increased.
	The intuitive mystical detachment of Russia began to define itself, and so consolidate itself, in terms of the intellectual detachment of the best thought of the West.
	Iconoclasm was harnessed.
	The life of the senses and of impulse was tempered by a new critical movement.
	Fanatical materialism, whose fire had been derived from a misinterpreted, but intense, mystical intuition of dispassionate Reality, began to assimilate itself to the far more rational stoicism which was the rare flower of the West.
	At the same time, through intercourse with peasant culture and with the peoples of Asia, the new Russia began to grasp in one unifying act of apprehension both the grave disillusion of France and England and the ecstasy of the East.
</p>
<p>
	The harmonizing of these two moods was now the chief spiritual need of mankind.
	Failure to integrate them into an all-dominant sentiment could not but lead to racial insanity.
	And so in due course it befell.
	Meanwhile this task of integration was coming to seem more and more urgent to the best minds in Russia, and might have been finally accomplished had they been longer illumined by the cold light of the West.
</p>
<p>
	But this was not to be.
	The intellectual confidence of France and England, already shaken through progressive economic eclipse at the hands of America and Germany, was now undermined.
	For many decades England had watched these newcomers capture her markets.
	The loss had smothered her with a swarm of domestic problems, such as could never be solved save by drastic surgery; and this was a course which demanded more courage and energy than was possible to a people without hope.
	Then came the war with France, and harrowing disintegration.
	No delirium seized her, such as occurred in France; yet her whole mentality was changed, and her sobering influence in Europe was lessened.
</p>
<p>
	As for France, her cultural life was now grievously reduced.
	It might, indeed, have recovered from the final blow, had it not already been slowly poisoned by gluttonous nationalism.
	For love of France was the undoing of the French.
	They prized the truly admirable spirit of France so extravagantly, that they regarded all other nations as barbarians.
</p>
<p>
	Thus it befell that in Russia the doctrines of communism and materialism, products of German systematists, survived uncriticized.
	On the other hand, the practice of communism was gradually undermined.
	For the Russian state came increasingly under the influence of Western, and especially American, finance.
	The materialism of the official creed also became a farce, for it was foreign to the Russian mind.
	Thus between practice and theory there was, in both respects, a profound inconsistency.
	What was once a vital and promising culture became insincere.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
