<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅩⅠⅠ–1: The Cult of Evanescence • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-12-1" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 1<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Cult of Evanescence</span>
</h3>
<p>
	<span class="first-words">The</span> Fifth Men had not been endowed with that potential immortality which their makers themselves possessed.
	And from the fact that they were mortal and yet long-lived, their culture drew its chief brilliance and poignancy.
	Beings for whom the natural span was three thousand years, and ultimately as much as fifty thousand, were peculiarly troubled by the prospect of death, and by the loss of those dear to them.
	The mere ephemeral kind of spirit, that comes into being and then almost immediately ceases, before it has entered at all deeply into consciousness of itself, can face its end with a courage that is half unwitting.
	Even its smart in the loss of other beings with whom it has been intimate is but a vague and dreamlike suffering.
	For the ephemeral spirit has no time to grow fully awake, or fully intimate with another, before it must lose its beloved, and itself once more fade into unconsciousness.
	But with the long-lived yet not immortal Fifth Men the case was different.
	Gathering to themselves experience of the cosmos, acquiring an ever more precise and vivid insight and appreciation, they knew that very soon all this wealth of the soul must cease to be.
	And in love, though they might be fully intimate not merely with one but with very many persons, the death of one of these dear spirits seemed an irrevocable tragedy, an utter annihilation of the most resplendent kind of glory, an impoverishment of the cosmos for evermore,
</p>
<p>
	In their brief primitive phase, the Fifth Men, like so many other races, sought to console themselves by unreasoning faith in a life after death.
	They conceived, for instance, that at death terrestrial beings embarked upon a career continuous with earthly life, but far more ample, either in some remote planetary system, or in some wholly distinct orb of space-time.
	But though such theories were never disproved in the primitive era, they gradually began to seem not merely improbable but ignoble.
	For it came to be recognized that the resplendent glories of personality, even in that degree of beauty which now for the first time was attained, were not after all the extreme of glory.
	It was seen with pain, but also with exultation, that even love’s demand that the beloved should have immortal life is a betrayal of man’s paramount allegiance.
	And little by little it became evident that those who used great gifts, and even genius, to establish the truth of the after life, or to seek contact with their beloved dead, suffered from a strange blindness, and obtuseness of the spirit.
	Though the love which had misled them was itself a very lovely thing, yet they were misled.
	Like children, searching for lost toys, they wandered.
	Like adolescents seeking to recapture delight in the things of childhood, they shunned those more difficult admirations which are proper to the grown mind.
</p>
<p>
	And so it became a constant aim of the Fifth Men to school themselves to admire chiefly even in the very crisis of bereavement, not persons, but that great music of innumerable personal lives, which is the life of the race.
	And quite early in their career they discovered an unexpected beauty in the very fact that the individual must die.
	So that, when they had actually come into possession of the means to make themselves immortal, they refrained, choosing rather merely to increase the lifespan of succeeding generations to fifty thousand years.
	Such a period seemed to be demanded for the full exercise of human capacity; but immortality, they held, would lead to spiritual disaster.
</p>
<p>
	Now as their science advanced they saw that there had been a time, before the stars were formed, when there was no possible footing for minds in the cosmos; and that there would come a time when mentality would be driven out of existence.
	Earlier human species had not needed to trouble about mind’s ultimate fate; but for the long-lived Fifth Men the end, though remote, did not seem infinitely distant.
	The prospect distressed them.
	They had schooled themselves to live not for the individual but for the race; and now the life of the race itself was seen to be a mere instant between the endless void of the past and the endless void of the future.
	Nothing within their ken was more worthy of admiration than the organized progressive mentality of mankind; and the conviction that this most admired thing must soon cease, filled many of their less ample minds with horror and indignation.
	But in time the Fifth Men, like the Second Men long before them, came to suspect that even in this tragic brevity of mind’s course there was a quality of beauty, more difficult than the familiar beauty, but also more exquisite.
	Even thus imprisoned in an instant, the spirit of man might yet plumb the whole extent of space, and also the whole past and the whole future; and so, from behind his prison bars, he might render the universe that intelligent worship which, they felt, it demanded of him.
	Better so, they said, than that he should fret himself with puny efforts to escape.
	He is dignified by his very weakness, and the cosmos by its very indifference to him.
</p>
<p>
	For aeons they remained in this faith.
	And they schooled their hearts to acquiesce in it, saying, if it is so, it is best, and somehow we must learn to see that it is best.
	But what they meant by “best” was not what their predecessors would have meant.
	They did not, for instance, deceive themselves by pretending that after all they themselves actually preferred life to be evanescent.
	On the contrary, they continued to long that it might be otherwise.
	But having discovered, both behind the physical order and behind the desires of minds, a fundamental principle whose essence was æsthetic, they were faithful to the conviction that whatever was fact must somehow in the universal view be fitting, right, beautiful, integral to the form of the cosmos.
	And so they accepted as right a state of affairs which in their own hearts they still felt grievously wrong.
	This conviction of the irrevocability of the past and of the evanescence of mind induced in them a great tenderness for all beings that had lived and ceased.
	Deeming themselves to be near the crest of life’s achievement, blessed also with longevity and philosophic detachment, they were often smitten with pity for those humbler, briefer and less free spirits whose lot had fallen in the past.
	Moreover, themselves extremely complex, subtle, conscious, they conceived a generous admiration for all simple minds, for the early men, and for the beasts.
	Very strongly they condemned the action of their predecessors in destroying so many joyous and delectible creatures.
	Earnestly they sought to reconstruct in imagination all those beings that blind intellectualism had murdered.
	Earnestly they delved in the near and the remote past so as to recover as much as possible of the history of life on the planet.
	With meticulous love they would figure out the life stories of extinct types, such as the brontosaurus, the hippopotamus, the chimpanzee, the Englishman, the American, as also of the still extant amœba.
	And while they could not but relish the comicality of these remote beings, their amusement was the outgrowth of affectionate insight into simple natures, and was but the obverse of their recognition that the primitive is essentially tragic, because blind.
	And so, while they saw that the main work of man must have regard to the future, they felt that he owed also a duty toward the past.
	He must preserve it in his own mind, if not actually in life at least in being.
	In the future lay glory, joy, brilliance of the spirit.
	The future needed service, not pity, not piety; but in the past lay darkness, confusion, waste, and all the cramped primitive minds, bewildered, torturing one another in their stupidity, yet one and all in some unique manner, beautiful.
</p>
<p>
	The reconstruction of the past, not merely as abstract history but with the intimacy of the novel, thus became one of the main preoccupations of the Fifth Men.
	Many devoted themselves to this work, each individual specializing very minutely in some particular episode of human or animal history, and transmitting his work into the culture of the race.
	Thus increasingly the individual felt himself to be a single flicker between the teeming gulf of the never-more and the boundless void of the not-yet.
	Himself a member of a very noble and fortunate race, his zest in existence was tempered, deepened, by a sense of the presence, the ghostly presence, of the myriad less fortunate beings in the past.
	Sometimes, and especially in epochs when the contemporary world seemed most satisfactory and promising, this piety toward the primitive and the past became the dominant activity of the race, giving rise to alternating phases of rebellion against the tyrannical nature of the cosmos, and faith that in the universal view, after all, this horror must be right.
	In this latter mood it was held that the very irrevocability of the past dignified all past existents, and dignified the cosmos, as a work of tragic art is dignified by the irrevocability of disaster.
	It was this mood of acquiescence and faith which in the end became the characteristic attitude of the Fifth Men for many millions of years.
</p>
<p>
	But a bewildering discovery was in store for the Fifth Men, a discovery which was to change their whole attitude toward existence.
	Certain obscure biological facts began to make them suspect, on purely empirical grounds, that past events were not after all simply nonexistent, that though no longer existent in the temporal manner, they had eternal existence in some other manner.
	The effect of this increasing suspicion about the past was that a once harmonious race was divided for a while into two parties, those who insisted that the formal beauty of the universe demanded the tragic evanescence of all things, and those who determined to show that living minds could actually reach back into past events in all their pastness.
</p>
<p>
	The readers of this book are not in a position to realize the poignancy of the conflict which now threatened to wreck humanity.
	They cannot approach it from the point of view of a race whose culture had consisted of an age-long schooling in admiration of an ever-vanishing cosmos.
	To the orthodox it seemed that the new view was iconoclastic, impertinent, vulgar.
	Their opponents, on the other hand, insisted that the matter must be decided dispassionately, according to the evidence.
	They were also able to point out that this devotion to evanescence was after all but the outcome of the conviction that the cosmos must be supremely noble.
	No one, it was said, really had direct vision of evanescence as in itself an excellence.
	So heartfelt was the dispute that the orthodox party actually broke off all “telepathic” communication with the rebels, and even went so far as to plan their destruction.
	There can be no doubt that if violence had actually been used the human race would have succumbed; for in a species of such high mental development internecine war would have been a gross violation of its nature.
	It would never have been able to live down so shameful a spiritual disaster.
	Fortunately, however, at the eleventh hour, common sense prevailed.
	The iconoclasts were permitted to carry on their research, and the whole race awaited the result.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
