<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅤⅠⅠⅠ–1: The First Martian Invasion • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-08-1" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 1<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The First Martian Invasion</span>
</h3>
<p>
	<span class="first-words">Upon</span> the foothills of the new and titanic mountains that were once the Hindu Kush, were many holiday centres, whence the young men and women of Asia were wont to seek Alpine dangers and hardships for their souls’ refreshment.
	It was in this district, and shortly after a summer dawn, that the Martians were first seen by men.
	Early walkers noticed that the sky had an unaccountably greenish tinge, and that the climbing sun, though free from cloud, was wan.
	Observers were presently surprised to see the green concentrate itself into a thousand tiny cloudlets, with clear blue between.
	Field-glasses revealed within each fleck of green some faint hint of a ruddy nucleus, and shifting strands of an infra-red colour, which would have been invisible to the earlier human race.
	These extraordinary specks of cloud were all of about the same size, the largest of them appearing smaller than the moon’s disk; hut in form they varied greatly, and were seen to be changing their shapes more rapidly than the natural cirrus which they slightly resembled.
	In fact, though there was much that was cloudlike in their form and motion, there was also something definite about them, both in their features and behaviour, which suggested life.
	Indeed they were strongly reminiscent of primitive amœboid organisms seen through a microscope.
</p>
<p>
	The whole sky was strewn with them, here and there in concentrations of unbroken green, elsewhere more sparsely.
	And they were observed to be moving.
	A general drift of the whole celestial population was setting toward one of the snowy peaks that dominated the landscape.
	Presently the foremost individuals reached the mountain’s crest, and were seen to be creeping down the rock-face with a very slow amœboid action.
</p>
<p>
	Meanwhile a couple of aeroplanes, electrically driven, had climbed the sky to investigate the strange phenomenon at close quarters.
	They passed among the drifting cloudlets, and actually through many of them, without hindrance, and almost without being obscured from view.
</p>
<p>
	On the mountain a vast swarm of the cloudlets was collecting, and creeping down the precipices and snow-fields into a high glacier valley.
	At a certain point, where the glacier dropped steeply to a lower level, the advance guard slowed down and stopped, while hosts of their fellows continued to pack in on them from behind.
	In half an hour the whole sky was once more clear, save for normal clouds; but upon the glacier lay what might almost have been an exceptionally dark solid-looking thunder-cloud, save for its green tinge and seething motion.
	For some minutes this strange object was seen to concentrate itself into a somewhat smaller bulk and become darker.
	Then it moved forward again, and passed over the cliffy end of the glacier into the pine-clad valley.
	An intervening ridge now hid it from its first observers.
</p>
<p>
	Lower down the valley there was a village.
	Many of the inhabitants, when they saw the mysterious dense fume advancing upon them, took to their mechanical vehicles and fled; but some waited out of curiosity.
	They were swallowed up in a murky olive-brown fog, shot here and there with queer shimmering streaks of a ruddier tint.
	Presently there was complete darkness.
	Artificial lights were blotted out almost at arm’s length.
	Breathing became difficult.
	Throats and lungs were irritated.
	Every one was seized with a violent attack of sneezing and coughing.
	The cloud streamed through the village, and seemed to exercise irregular pressures upon objects, not always in the general direction of movement but sometimes in the opposite direction, as though it were getting a purchase upon human bodies and walls, and actually elbowing its way along.
	Within a few minutes the fog lightened; and presently it left the village behind it, save for a few strands and whiffs of its smoke-like substance, which had become entangled in side-streets and isolated.
	Very soon, however, these seemed to get themselves clear and hurry to overtake the main body.
</p>
<p>
	When the gasping villagers had somewhat recovered, they sent a radio message to the little town lower down the valley, urging temporary evacuation.
	The message was not broadcast, but transmitted on a slender beam of rays.
	It so happened that the beam had to be directed through the noxious matter itself.
	While the message was being given, the cloud’s progress ceased, and its outlines became vague and ragged.
	Fragments of it actually drifted away on the winds and dissipated themselves.
	Almost as soon as the message was completed, the cloud began to define itself again, and lay for a quarter of an hour at rest.
	A dozen bold young men from the town now approached the dark mass out of curiosity.
	No sooner did they come face to face with it, round a bend in the valley, than the cloud rapidly contracted, till it was no bigger than a house.
	Looking now something between a dense, opaque fume and an actual jelly, it lay still until the party had ventured within a few yards.
	Evidently their courage failed, for they were seen to turn.
	But before they had retreated three paces, a long proboscis shot out of the main mass with the speed of a chameleon’s tongue, and enveloped them.
	Slowly it withdrew; but the young men had been gathered in with it.
	The cloud, or jelly, churned itself violently for some seconds, then ejected the bodies in a single chewed lump.
</p>
<p>
	The murderous thing now elbowed itself along the road toward the town, leaned against the first house, crushed it, and proceeded to wander hither and thither, pushing everything down before it, as though it were a lava-stream.
	The inhabitants took to their heels, but several were licked up and slaughtered.
</p>
<p>
	Powerful beam radiation was now poured into the cloud from all the neighbouring installations.
	Its destructive activity slackened, and once more it began to disintegrate and expand.
	Presently it streamed upwards as a huge column of smoke; and, at a great altitude, it dissipated itself again into a swarm of the original green cloudlets, noticeably reduced in numbers.
	These again faded into a uniform greenish tinge, which gradually vanished.
</p>
<p>
	Thus ended the first invasion of the Earth from Mars.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
