<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅤⅠⅠⅠ–3: The Martian Mind • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-08-3" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 3<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Martian Mind</span>
</h3>
<p>
	The Martian mind was of a very different type from the terrestrial, – different, yet at bottom identical.
	In so strange a body, the mind was inevitably equipped with alien cravings, and alien manners of apprehending its environment.
	And with so different a history, it was confused by prejudices very unlike those of man.
	Yet it was none the less mind, concerned in the last resort with the maintenance and advancement of life, and the exercise of vital capacities.
	Fundamentally the Martian was like all other living beings, in that he delighted in the free working of his body and his mind.
	Yet superficially, he was as unlike man in mind as in body.
</p>
<p>
	The most distinctive feature of the Martian, compared with man, was that his individuality was both far more liable to disruption, and at the same time immeasurably more capable of direct participation in the minds of other individuals.
	The human mind in its solid body maintained its unity and its dominance over its members in all normal circumstances.
	Only in disease was man liable to mental or physical dissociation.
	On the other hand, he was incapable of direct contact with other individuals, and the emergence of a “super-mind” in a group of individuals was quite impossible.
	The Martian cloudlet, however, though he fell to pieces physically, and also mentally, far more readily than a man, might also at any moment wake up to be the intelligent mind of his race, might begin to perceive with the sense-organs of all other individuals, and experience thoughts and desires which were, so to speak, the resultant of all individual thoughts and desires upon some matter of general interest.
	But unfortunately, as I shall tell, the common mind of the Martians never woke into any order of mentality higher than that of the individual.
</p>
<p>
	These differences between the Martian and the human psyche entailed characteristic advantages and disadvantages.
	The Martian, immune from man’s inveterate selfishness and spiritual isolation from his fellows, lacked the mental coherence, the concentrated attention and farreaching analysis and synthesis, and again the vivid self-consciousness and relentless self-criticism, which even the First Men, at their best, had attained in some degree, and which in the Second Men were still more developed.
	The Martians, moreover, were hampered by being almost identical in character.
	They possessed perfect harmony; but only through being almost wholly in temperamental unison.
	They were all hobbled by their sameness to one another.
	They were without that rich diversity of personal character, which enabled the human spirit to cover so wide a field of mentality.
	This infinite variety of human nature entailed, indeed, endless wasteful and cruel personal conflicts in the first, and even to some extent in the second, species of man; but also it enabled every individual of developed sympathy to enrich his spirit by intercourse with individuals whose temperament, thought and ideals differed from his own.
	And while the Martians were little troubled by internecine strife and the passion of hate, they were also almost wholly devoid of the passion of love.
	The Martian individual could admire, and be utterly faithful to, the object of his loyalty; but his admiration was given, not to concrete and uniquely charactered persons of the same order as himself, but at best to the vaguely conceived “spirit of the race.” Individuals like himself he regarded merely as instruments or organs of the “super-mind.”
</p>
<p>
	This would not have been amiss, had the mind of the race, into which he so frequently awoke under the influence of the general radiation, been indeed a mind of higher rank than his own.
	But it was not.
	It was but a pooling of the percipience and thought and will of the cloudlets.
	Thus it was that the superb loyalty of the Martians was squandered upon something which was not greater than themselves in mental calibre, but only in mere bulk.
</p>
<p>
	The Martian cloudlet, like the human animal, had a complex instinctive nature.
	By night and day, respectively, he was impelled to perform the vegetative functions of absorbing chemicals from the ground and energy from the sunlight.
	Air and water he also craved, though he dealt with them, of course, in his own manner.
	He had also his own characteristic instinctive impulses to move his “body,” both for locomotion and manipulation.
	Martian civilization provided an outlet for these cravings, both in the practice of agriculture and in intricate and wonderfully beautiful cloud-dances and gymnastics.
	For these perfectly supple beings rejoiced in executing aerial evolutions, flinging out wild rhythmical streamers, intertwining with one another in spirals, concentrating into opaque spheres, cubes, cones, and all sorts of fantastical volumes.
	Many of these movements and shapes had intense emotional significance for them in relation to the operations of their life, and were executed with a religious fervour and solemnity.
</p>
<p>
	The Martian had also his impulses of fear and pugnacity.
	In the remote past these had often been directed against hostile members of his own species; but since the race had become unified, they found exercise only upon other types of life and upon inanimate nature.
	Instinctive gregariousness was, of course, extremely developed in the Martian at the expense of instinctive self-assertion.
	Sexuality the Martian had not; there were no partners in reproduction.
	But his impulse to merge physically and mentally with other individuals, and wake up as the super-mind, had in it much that was characteristic of sex in man.
	Parental impulses, of a kind, he knew; but they were scarcely worthy of the name.
	He cared only to eject excessive living matter from his system, and to keep <i lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">en rapport</i> with the new individual thus formed, as he would with any other individual.
	He knew no more of the human devotion to children as budding personalities than of the subtle intercourse of male and female temperaments.
	By the time of the first invasion, however, reproduction had been greatly restricted; for the planet was fully populated, and each individual cloudlet was potentially immortal.
	Among the Martians there was no “natural death,” no spontaneous death through mere senility.
	Normally the cloudlet’s members kept themselves in repair indefinitely by the reproduction of their constituent units.
	Diseases, indeed, were often fatal.
	And chief among them was a plague, corresponding to terrestrial cancer, in which the subvital units lost their sensitivity to radiation, so that they proceeded to live as primitive organisms and reproduced without restraint.
	As they also became parasitic on the unaffected units, the cloudlet inevitably died.
</p>
<p>
	Like the higher kinds of terrestrial mammal, the Martians had strong impulses of curiosity.
	Having also many practical needs to fulfil as a result of their civilization, and being extremely well equipped by nature for physical experiment and microscopy, they had gone far in the natural sciences.
	In physics, astronomy, chemistry and even in the chemistry of life, man had nothing to teach them.
</p>
<p>
	The vast corpus of Martian knowledge had taken many thousands of years to grow.
	All its stages, and its current achievements were recorded on immense scrolls of paper made from vegetable pulp, and stored in libraries of stone.
	For the Martians, curiously enough, had become great masons, and had covered much of their planet with buildings of feathery and toppling design, such as would have been quite impossible on earth.
	They had no need of buildings for habitation, save in the arctic regions; but as workshops, granaries, and store rooms of all sorts, buildings had become very necessary to the Martians.
	Moreover these extremely tenuous creatures took a peculiar joy in manipulating solids.
	Even their most utilitarian architecture blossomed with a sort of gothic or arabesque ornateness and fantasy, wherein the ethereal seemed to torture the substance of solid rocks into its own likeness.
</p>
<p>
	At the time of the invasion, the Martians were still advancing intellectually; and, indeed, it was through an achievement in theoretical physics that they were able to leave their planet.
	They had long known that minute particles at the upper limit of the atmosphere might be borne into space by the pressure of the sun’s rays at dawn and sunset.
	And at length they discovered how to use this pressure as the wind is used in sailing.
	Dissipating themselves into their ultramicroscopic units, they contrived to get a purchase on the gravitational fields of the solar system, as a boat’s keel and rudder get a purchase on the water.
	Thus they were able to tack across to the earth as an armada of ultramicroscopic vessels.
	Arrived in the terrestrial sky, they reformed themselves as cloudlets, swam through the dense air to the alpine summit, and climbed downwards, as a swimmer may climb down a ladder under water.
</p>
<p>
	This achievement involved very intricate calculations and chemical inventions, especially for the preservation of life in transit and on an alien planet.
	It could never have been done save by beings with far-reaching and accurate knowledge of the physical world.
	But though in respect of “natural knowledge” the Martians were so well advanced, they were extremely backward in all those spheres which may be called “spiritual knowledge.”
	They had little understanding of their own mentality, and less of the place of mind in the cosmos.
	Though in a sense a highly intelligent species, they were at the same time wholly lacking in philosophical interest.
	They scarcely conceived, still less tackled, the problems which even the First Men had faced so often, though so vainly.
	For the Martians there was no mystery in the distinction between reality and appearance or in the relation of the one and the many, or in the status of good and evil.
	Nor were they ever critical of their own ideals.
	They aimed whole-heartedly at the advancement of the Martian super-individual.
	But what should constitute individuality, and its advancement, they never seriously considered.
	And the idea that they were under obligation also toward beings not included in the Martian system of radiation, proved wholly beyond them.
	For, though so clever, they were the most naïve of self-deceivers, and had no insight to see what it is that is truly desirable.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
