<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅠⅤ–4: The Culture of the First World State • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-04-4" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 4<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Culture of the First World State</span>
</h3>
<p>
	Such was the physical achievement of this civilization.
	Nothing half so artificial and intricate and prosperous had ever before existed.
	An earlier age, indeed, had held before itself some such ideal as this; but its nationalistic mania prevented it from attaining the necessary economic unity.
	This latter-day civilization, however, had wholly outgrown nationalism, and had spent many centuries of peace in consolidating itself.
	But to what end?
	The terrors of destitution and ill-health having been abolished, man’s spirit was freed from a crippling burden, and might have dared great adventures.
	But unfortunately his intelligence had by now seriously declined.
	And so this age, far more than the notorious “nineteenth century,” was the great age of barren complacency.
</p>
<p>
	Every individual was a well-fed and physically healthy human animal.
	He was also economically independent.
	His working day was never more than six hours, often only four.
	He enjoyed a fair share of the products of industry; and in his long holidays he was free to wander in his own aeroplane all over the planet.
	With good luck he might find himself rich, even for those days, at forty; and if fortune had not favoured him, he might yet expect affluence before he was eighty, when he could still look forward to a century of active life.
</p>
<p>
	But in spite of this material prosperity he was a slave.
	His work and his leisure consisted of feverish activity, punctuated by moments of listless idleness which he regarded as both sinful and unpleasant.
	Unless he was one of the furiously successful minority, he was apt to be haunted by moments of brooding, too formless to be called meditation, and of yearning, too blind to be called desire.
	For he and all his contemporaries were ruled by certain ideas which prevented them from living a fully human life.
</p>
<p>
	Of these ideas one was the ideal of progress.
	For the individual, the goal imposed by his religious teaching was continuous advancement in aeronautical prowess, legal sexual freedom, and millionaireship.
	For the race also the ideal was progress, and progress of the same unintelligent type.
	Ever more brilliant and extensive aviation, ever more extensive legal sexual intercourse, ever more gigantic manufacture, and consumption, were to be co-ordinated in an ever more intricately organized social system.
	For the last three thousand years, indeed, progress even of this rude kind had been minute; but this was a source of pride rather than of regret.
	It implied that the goal was already almost attained, the perfection which should justify the release of the secret of divine power, and the inauguration of an era of incomparably mightier activity.
</p>
<p>
	For the all-pervading idea which tyrannized over the race was the fanatical worship of movement.
	Gordelpus, the Prime Mover, demanded of his human embodiments swift and intricate activity, and the individual’s prospect of eternal life depended on the fulfilment of this obligation.
	Curiously, though science had long ago destroyed the belief in personal immortality as an intrinsic attribute of man, a complementary belief had grown up to the effect that those who justified themselves in action were preserved eternally, by special miracle, in the swift spirit of Gordelpus.
	Thus from childhood to death the individual’s conduct was determined by the obligation to produce as much motion as possible.
	whether by his own muscular activity or by the control of natural forces.
	In the hierarchy of industry three occupations were honoured almost as much as the Sacred Order of Scientists, namely, flying, dancing, and athletics.
	Every one practised all three of these crafts to some extent, for they were imposed by religion; but the professional fliers and aeronautical engineers, and the professional dancers and athletes, were a privileged class.
</p>
<p>
	Several causes had raised flying to a position of unique honour.
	As a means of communication it was of extreme practical importance; and as the swiftest locomotion it constituted the supreme act of worship.
	The accident that the form of the aeroplane was reminiscent of the main symbol of the ancient Christian religion lent flying an additional mystical significance.
	For though the spirit of Christianity was lost, many of its symbols had been preserved in the new faith.
	A more important source of the dominance of flying was that, since warfare had long ceased to exist, aviation of a gratuitously dangerous kind was the main outlet for the innate adventurousness of the human animal.
	Young men and women risked their lives fervently for the glory of Gordelpus and their own salvation, while their seniors took vicarious satisfaction in this endless festival of youthful prowess.
	Indeed apart from the thrills of devotional aerial acrobats, it is unlikely that the race would so long have preserved its peace and its unity.
	On each of the frequent Days of Sacred Flight special rituals of communal and solo aviation were performed at every religious centre.
	On these occasions the whole sky would he intricately patterned with thousands of planes, wheeling, tumbling, soaring, plunging, in perfect order and at various altitudes, the dance at one level being subtly complementary to the dance at others.
	It was as though the spontaneous evolutions of many distinct flocks of redshank and dunlin were multiplied a thousand-fold in complexity, and subordinated to a single ever-developing terpsichorean theme.
	Then suddenly the whole would burst asunder to the horizon, leaving the sky open for the quartets, duets and solos of the most brilliant stars of flight.
	At night also, regiments of planes bearing coloured lights would inscribe on the zenith ever-changing and symbolical patterns of fire.
	Besides these aerial dances, there had existed for eight hundred years a custom of spelling out periodically in a dense flight of planes six thousand miles long the sacred rubrics of the gospel of Gordelpus, so that the living word might be visible to other plants.
</p>
<p>
	In the life of every individual, flying played a great part.
	Immediately after birth he was taken up by a priestess of flight and dropped, clinging to a parachute, to be deftly caught upon the wings of his father’s plane.
	This ritual served as a substitute for contraception (forbidden as an interference with the divine energy); for since in many infants the old simian grasping-instinct was atrophied, a large proportion of the new-born let go and were smashed upon the paternal wings.
	At adolescence the individual (male or female) took charge of a plane for the first time, and his life was subsequently punctuated by severe aeronautical tests.
	From middle age onwards, namely as a centenarian, when he could no longer hope to rise in the hierarchy of active flight, he continued to fly daily for practical purposes.
</p>
<p>
	The two other forms of ritual activity, dancing and athletics, were scarcely less important.
	Nor were they confined wholly to the ground.
	For certain rites were celebrated by dances upon the wings of a plane in mid air.
</p>
<p>
	Dancing was especially associated with the Negro race, which occupied a very peculiar position in the world at this time.
	As a matter of fact the great colour distinctions of mankind were now beginning to fade.
	Increased aerial communication had caused the black, brown, yellow and white stocks so to mingle that everywhere there was by now a large majority of the racially indistinguishable.
	Nowhere was there any great numher of persons of marked racial character.
	But each of the ancient types was liable to crop up now and again in isolated individuals, especially in its ancient homeland.
	These “throw-backs” were customarily treated in special and historically appropriate manners.
	Thus, for instance, it was to “sports” of definite Negro character that the most sacred dancing was entrusted.
</p>
<p>
	In the days of the nations, the descendants of emancipated African slaves in North America had greatly influenced the artistic and religious life of the white population, and had inspired a cult of negroid dancing which survived till the end of the First Men.
	This was partly due to the sexual and primitive character of Negro dancing, sorely needed in a nation ridden by sexual taboos.
	But it had also a deeper source.
	The American nation had acquired its slaves by capture, and had long continued to spurn their descendants.
	Later it unconsciously compensated for its guilt by a cult of the Negro spirit.
	Thus when American culture dominated the planet, the pure Negroes became a sacred caste.
	Forbidden many of the rights of citizenship, they were regarded as the private servants of Gordelpus.
	They were both sacred and outcast.
	This dual role was epitomized in an extravagant ritual which took place once a year in each of the great national parks.
	A white woman and a Negro, both chosen for their prowess in dance, performed a long and symbolical ballet, which culminated in a ritual act of sexual violation, performed in full view of the maddened spectators.
	This over, the Negro knifed his victim, and fled through the forest pursued by an exultant mob.
	If he reached sanctuary, he became a peculiarly sacred object for the rest of his life.
	But if he was caught, he was torn to pieces or drenched with inflammable spirit and burned.
	Such was the superstition of the First Men at this time that the participants in this ceremony were seldom reluctant; for it was firmly believed that both were assured of eternal life in Gordelpus.
	In America this Sacred Lynching was the most popular of all festivals; for it was both sexual and bloody, and afforded a fierce joy to the masses whose sex-life was restricted and secret.
	In India and Africa the violator was always an “Englishman,” when such a rare creature could be found.
	In China the whole character of the ceremony was altered; for the violation became a kiss, and the murder a touch with a fan.
</p>
<p>
	One other race, the Jews, were treated with a similar combination of honour and contempt, but for very different reasons.
	In ancient days their general intelligence, and in particuiar their financial talent, had cooperated with their homelessness to make them outcasts; and now, in the decline of the First Men, they retained the fiction, if not strictly the fact, of racial integrity.
	They were still outcasts, though indispensable and powerful.
	Almost the only kind of intelligent activity which the First Men could still respect was financial operation, whether private or cosmopolitan.
	The Jews had made themselves invaluable in the financial organization of the world state, having far outstripped the other races because they alone had preserved a furtive respect for pure intelligence.
	And so, long after intelligence had come to be regarded as disreputable in ordinary men and women, it was expected of the Jews.
	In them it was called satanic cunning, and they were held to be embodiments of the powers of evil, harnessed in the service of Gordelpus.
	Thus in time the Jews had made something like “a corner” in intelligence.
	This precious commodity they used largely for their own purposes; for two thousand years of persecution had long ago rendered them permanently tribalistic, subconsciously if not consciously.
	Thus when they had gained control of the few remaining operations which demanded originality rather than routine, they used this advantage chiefly to strengthen their own position in the world.
	For, though relatively bright, they had suffered much of the general coarsening and limitation which had beset the whole world.
	Though capable to some extent of criticizing the practical means by which ends should be realized, they were by now wholly incapable of criticizing the major ends which had dominated their race for thousands of years.
	In them intelligence had become utterly subservient to tribalism.
	There was thus some excuse for the universal hate and even physical repulsion with which they were regarded; for they alone had failed to make the one great advance, from tribalism to a cosmopolitanism which in other races was no longer merely theoretical.
	There was good reason also for the respect which they received, since they retained and used somewhat ruthlessly a certain degree of the most distinctively human attribute, intelligence.
</p>
<p>
	In primitive times the intelligence and sanity of the race had been preserved by the inability of its unwholesome members to survive.
	When humanitarianism came into vogue, and the unsound were tended at public expense, this natural selection ceased.
	And since these unfortunates were incapable alike of prudence and of social responsibility, they procreated without restraint, and threatened to infect the whole species with their rottenness.
	During the zenith of Western Civilization, therefore, the subnormal were sterilized.
	But the latter-day worshippers of Gordelpus regarded both sterilization and contraception as a wicked interference with the divine potency.
	Consequently the only restriction on population was the suspension of the new-born from aeroplanes, a process which, though it eliminated weaklings, favoured among healthy infants rather the primitive than the highly developed.
	Thus the intelligence of the race steadily declined.
	And no one regretted it.
</p>
<p>
	The general revulsion from intelligence was a corollary of the adoration of instinct, and this in turn was an aspect of the worship of activity.
	Since the unconscious source of human vigour was the divine energy, spontaneous impulse must so far as possible never be thwarted.
	Reasoning was indeed permitted to the individual within the sphere of his official work, but never beyond.
	And not even specialists might indulge in reasoning and experiment without obtaining a licence for the particular research.
	The licence was expensive, and was only granted if the goal in view could be shown to be an increase of world activity.
	In old times certain persons of morbid curiosity had dared to criticize the time-honoured methods of doing things, and had suggested “better” methods not convenient to the Sacred Order of Scientists.
	This had to be stopped.
	By the fourth millennium of the World State the operations of civilization had become so intricately stereotyped that novel situations of a major order never occurred.
</p>
<p>
	One kind of intellectual pursuit in addition to finance was, indeed, honoured, namely mathematical calculation.
	All ritual movements, all the motions of industrial machinery, all observable natural phenomena, had to be minutely described in mathematical formulæ.
	The records were filed in the sacred archives of the S.O.S.
	And there they remained.
	The vast enterprise of mathematical description was the main work of the scientists, and was said to he the only means by which the evanescent thing, movement, could be passed into the eternal being of Gordelpus.
</p>
<p>
	The cult of instinct did not result simply in a life of ungoverned impulse.
	Far from it.
	For the fundamental instinct, it was said, was the instinct to worship Gordelpus in action, and this should rule all the other instincts.
	Of these, the most important and sacred was the sexual impulse, which the First Men had ever tended to regard as both divine and obscene.
	Sex, therefore, was now very strictly controlled.
	Reference to sexuality, save by circumlocution, was forbidden by law.
	Persons who remarked on the obvious sexual significance of the religious dances, were severely punished.
	No sexual activity and no sex knowledge were permitted to the individual until he had won his (or her) wings.
	Much information, of a distorted and perverted nature could, indeed, be gained meanwhile by observation of the religious writings and practices; hut officially these sacred matters were all given a metaphysical, not a sexual interpretation.
	And though legal maturity, the Wing-Winning, might occur as early as the age of fifteen, sometimes it was not attained till forty.
	If at that age the individual still failed in the test, he or she was forbidden sexual intercourse and information for ever.
</p>
<p>
	In China and India this extravagant sexual taboo was somewhat mitigated.
	Many easy-going persons had come to feel that the imparting of sex knowledge to the “immature” was only wrong when the medium of communication was the sacred American language.
	They therefore made use of the local patois.
	Similarly, sexual activity of the “immature” was permissible so long as it was performed solely in the wild reserves, and without American speech.
	These subterfuges, however, were condemned by the orthodox, even in Asia.
</p>
<p>
	When a man had won his wings, he was formally initiated into the mystery of sex and all its “biologico-religious” significance.
	He was also allowed to take a “domestic wife.” and after a much more severe aviation test, any number of “symbolical” wives.
	Similarly with the woman.
	These two kinds of partnership differed greatly.
	The “domestic” husband and wife appeared in public together, and their union was indissoluble.
	The “symbolic” union, on the other hand, could be dissolved by either party.
	Also it was too sacred ever to be revealed, or even mentioned, in public.
</p>
<p>
	A very large number of persons never passed the test which sanctioned sexuality.
	These either remained virgin, or indulged in sexual relations which were not only illegal but sacrilegious.
	The successful, on the other hand, were apt to consummate sexually every casual acquaintance.
</p>
<p>
	Under these circumstances it was natural that there should exist among the sexually submerged part of the population certain secret cults which sought escape from harsh reality into worlds of fantasy.
	Of these illicit sects, two were most widespread.
	One was a perversion of the ancient Christian faith in a God of Love.
	All love, it was said, is sexual; therefore in worship, private or public, the individual must seek a direct sexual relation with God.
	Hence arose a grossly phallic cult, very contemptible to those more fortunate persons who had no need of it.
</p>
<p>
	The other great heresy was derived partly from the energy of repressed intellective impulses, and was practised by persons of natural curiosity who, nevertheless, shared the universal paucity of intelligence.
	These pathetic devotees of intellect were inspired by Socrates.
	That great primitive had insisted that clear thought is impossible without clear definition of terms, and that without clear thinking man misses fullness of being.
	These his last disciples were scarcely less fervent admirers of truth than their master, yet they missed his spirit completely.
	Only by knowing the truth, they said, can the individual attain immortality; only by defining can he know the truth.
	Therefore, meeting together in secret, and in constant danger of arrest for illicit intellection, they disputed endlessly about the definition of things.
	But the things which they were concerned to define were not the basic concepts of human thought; for these, they affirmed, had been settled once for all by Socrates and his immediate followers.
	Therefore, accepting these as true, and grossly misunderstanding them, the ultimate Socratics undertook to define all the processes of the world state and the ritual of the established religion, all the emotions of men and women, all the shapes of noses, mouths, buildings, mountains, clouds, and in fact the whole superficies of their world.
	Thus they believe that they emancipated themselves from the philistinism of their age, and secured comradeship with Socrates in the hereafter.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
