<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅩⅤ–2: Childhood and Maturity • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-15-2" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 2<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">Childhood and Maturity</span>
</h3>
<p>
	I said that we were all astronomically minded; but we are not without “human” interests.
	Our visitor from the earth would soon discover that the low buildings, sprinkled on all sides, were the homes of individuals, families, sexual groups, and bands of companions.
	Most of these buildings are so constructed that the roof and walls can be removed, completely or partially, for sun-bathing and for the night.
	Round each house is a wilderness, or a garden, or an orchard of our sturdy fruit trees.
	Here and there men and women may be seen at work with hoe or spade or secateurs.
	The buildings themselves affect many styles; and within doors our visitor would find great variety from house to house.
	Even within a single house he might come on rooms seemingly of different epochs.
	And while some rooms are crowded with articles, many of which would be incomprehensible to the stranger, others are bare, save for a table, chairs, a cupboard, and perhaps some single object of pure art.
	We have an immense variety of manufactured goods.
	But the visitor from a world obsessed with material wealth would probably remark the simplicity, even austerity, which characterizes most private houses.
</p>
<p>
	He would doubtless be surprised to see no books.
	In every room, however, there is a cupboard filled with minute rolls of tape, microscopically figured.
	Each of these rolls contains matter which could not be cramped into a score of your volumes.
	They are used in connexion with a pocket-instrument, the size and shape of the ancient cigarette case.
	When the roll is inserted, it reels itself off at any desired speed, and interferes systematically with ethereal vibrations produced by the instrument.
	Thus is generated a very complex flow of “telepathic” language which permeates the brain of the reader.
	So delicate and direct is this medium of expression that there is scarcely any possibility of misunderstanding the author’s intention.
	The rolls themselves, it should be said, are produced by another special instrument, which is sensitive to vibrations generated in the author’s brain.
	Not that it produces a mere replica of his stream of consciousness; it records only those images and ideas with which he deliberately “inscribes” it.
	I may mention also that, since we can at any moment communicate by direct “telepathy” with any person on the planet, these “books” of ours are not used for the publication of merely ephemeral thought.
	Each one of them preserves only the threshed and chosen grains of some mind’s harvest.
</p>
<p>
	Other instruments may be observed in our houses, which I cannot pause to describe, instruments whose office is either to carry out domestic drudgery, or to minister directly in one way or another to cultured life.
	Near the outer door would be hanging a number of flying-suits, and in a garage attached to the house would be the private air-boats, gaily coloured torpedo-shaped objects of various sizes.
</p>
<p>
	Decoration in our houses, save in those which belong to children, is everywhere simple, even severe.
	None the less we prize it greatly, and spend much consideration upon it.
	Children, indeed, often adorn their houses with splendour, which adults themselves can also enjoy through children’s eyes, even as they can enter into the frolics of infants with unaffected glee.
</p>
<p>
	The number of children in our world is small in relation to our immense population.
	Yet, seeing that every one of us is potentially immortal, it may be wondered how we can permit ourselves to have any children at all.
	The explanation is two-fold.
	In the first place, our policy is to produce new individuals of higher type than ourselves, for we are very far from biologically perfect.
	Consequently we need a continuous supply of children.
	And as these successively reach maturity, they take over the functions of adults whose nature is less perfect; and these, when they are aware that they are no longer of service, elect to retire from life.
</p>
<p>
	But even though every individual, sooner or later, ceases to exist, the average length of life is not much less than a quarter of a million terrestrial years.
	No wonder, then, that we cannot accommodate many children.
	But we have more than might be expected, for with us infancy and adolescence are very lengthy.
	The fœtus is carried for twenty years.
	Ectogenesis was practised by our predecessors, but was abandoned by our own species, because, with greatly improved motherhood, there is no need for it.
	Our mothers, indeed, are both physically and mentally most vigorous during the all too rare period of pregnancy.
	After birth, true infancy lasts for about a century.
	During this period, in which the foundations of body and mind are being laid, very slowly, but so securely that they will never fail, the individual is cared for by his mother.
	Then follow some centuries of childhood, and a thousand years of adolescence.
</p>
<p>
	Our children, of course, are very different beings from the children of the First Men.
	Though physically they are in many respects still childlike, they are independent persons in the community.
	Each has either a house of his own, or rooms in a larger building held in common by himself and his friends.
	Thousands of these are to be found in the neighbourhood of every educational centre.
	There are some children who prefer to live with their parents, or with one or other of their parents; but this is rare.
	Though there is often much friendly intercourse between parents and children, the generations usually fare better under separate roofs.
	This is inevitable in our species.
	For the adult’s overwhelmingly greater experience reveals the world to him in very different proportions from those which alone are possible even to the most brilliant of children; while on the other hand with us the mind of every child is, in some potentiality or other, definitely superior to every adult mind.
	Consequently, while the child can never appreciate what is best in his elders, the adult, in spite of his power of direct insight into all minds not superior to himself, is doomed to incomprehension of all that is novel in his own offspring.
</p>
<p>
	Six or seven hundred years after birth a child is in some respects physically equivalent to a ten-year-old of the First Men.
	But since his brain is destined for much higher development, it is already far more complex than any adult brain of that species.
	And though temperamentally he is in many ways still a child, intellectually he has already in some respects passed beyond the culture of the best adult minds of the ancient races.
	The traveller, encountering one of our bright boys, might sometimes be reminded of the wise simplicity of the legendary Child Christ.
	But also he might equally well discover a vast exuberance, boisterousness, impishness, and a complete inability to stand outside the child’s own eager life and regard it dispassionately.
	In general our children develop intellectually beyond the level of the First Men long before they begin to develop the dispassionate will which is characteristic of our adults.
	When there is conflict between a child’s personal needs and the needs of society, he will as a rule force himself to the social course; but he does so with resentment and dramatic self-pity, thereby rendering himself in the adult view exquisitely ridiculous.
</p>
<p>
	When our children attain physical adolescence, nearly a thousand years after birth, they leave the safe paths of childhood to spend another thousand years in one of the antarctic continents, known as the Land of the Young.
	Somewhat reminiscent of the Wild Continent of the Fifth Men, this territory is preserved as virgin bush and prairie.
	Sub-human grazers and carnivora abound.
	Volcanic eruption, hurricanes and glacial seasons afford further attractions to the adventurous young.
	There is consequently a high death-rate.
	In this land our young people live the half primitive, half sophisticated life to which their nature is fitted.
	They hunt, fish, tend cattle and till the ground.
	They cultivate all the simple beauties of human individuality.
	They love and hate.
	They sing, paint and carve.
	They devise heroic myths, and delight in fantasies of direct intercourse with a cosmic person.
	They organize themselves as tribes and nations.
	Sometimes they even indulge in warfare of a primitive but bloody type.
	Formerly when this happened, the adult world interfered; but we have since learned to let the fever run its course.
	The loss of life is regrettable; but it is a small price to pay for the insight afforded even by this restricted and juvenile warfare, into those primitive agonies and passions which, when they are experienced by the adult mind, are so transformed by philosophy that their import is wholly changed.
	In the Land of the Young our boys and girls experience all that is precious and all that is abject in the primitive.
	They live through in their own persons, century by century, all its toilsomeness and cramped meanness, all its blind cruelty and precariousness; but also they taste its glamour, its vernal and lyrical glory.
	They make in little all the mistakes of thought and action that men have ever made; but at last they emerge ready for the larger and more difficult world of maturity.
</p>
<p>
	It was expected that some day, when we should have perfected the species, there would be no need to build up successive generations, no need of children, no need of all this schooling.
	It was expected that the community would then consist of adults only; and that they would be immortal not merely potentially but in fact, yet also, of course, perennially in the flower of young maturity.
	Thus, death should never cut the string of individuality and scatter the hard-won pearls, necessitating new strings, and laborious re-gatherings.
	The many and very delectable beauties of childhood could still be amply enjoyed in exploration of the past.
</p>
<p>
	We know now that this goal is not to be attained, since man’s end is imminent.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
