<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter Ⅰ–2: The Anglo–French War • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-01-2" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 2<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">The Anglo–French War</span>
</h3>
<p>
	One brief but tragic incident, which occurred within a century after the European War, may be said to have sealed the fate of the First Men.
	During this century the will for peace and sanity was already becoming a serious factor in history.
	Save for a number of most untoward accidents, to be recorded in due course, the party of peace might have dominated Europe during its most dangerous period; and, through Europe, the world.
	With either a little less bad luck or a fraction more of vision and self-control at this critical time, there might never have occurred that aeon of darkness, in which the First Men were presently to be submerged.
	For had victory been gained before the general level of mentality had seriously begun to decline, the attainment of the world state might have been regarded, not as an end, but as the first step toward true civilization.
	But this was not to be.
</p>
<p>
	After the European War the defeated nation, formerly no less militaristic than the others, now became the most pacific, and a stronghold of enlightenment.
	Almost everywhere, indeed, there had occurred a profound change of heart, but chiefly in Germany.
	The victors on the other hand, in spite of their real craving to be human and generous, and to found a new world, were led partly by their own timidity, partly by their governors’ blind diplomacy, into all the vices against which they believed themselves to have been crusading.
	After a brief period in which they desperately affected amity for one another they began to indulge once more in physical conflicts.
	Of these conflicts, two must be observed.
</p>
<p>
	The first outbreak, and the less disastrous for Europe, was a short and grotesque struggle between France and Italy.
	Since the fall of ancient Rome, the Italians had excelled more in art and literature than in martial achievement.
	But the heroic liberation of Italy in the nineteenth Christian century had made Italians peculiarly sensitive to national prestige; and since among Western peoples national vigour was measured in terms of military glory, the Italians were fired, by their success against a rickety foreign domination, to vindicate themselves more thoroughly against the charge of mediocrity in warfare.
	After the European War, however, Italy passed through a phase of social disorder and self-distrust.
	Subsequently a flamboyant but sincere national party gained control of the State, and afforded the Italians a new self-respect, based on reform of the social services, and on militaristic policy.
	Trains became punctual, streets clean, morals puritanical.
	Aviation records were won for Italy.
	The young, dressed up and taught to play at soldiers with real fire-arms, were persuaded to regard themselves as saviours of the nation, encouraged to shed blood, and used to enforce the will of the Government.
	The whole movement was engineered chiefly by a man whose genius in action combined with his rhetoric and crudity of thought to make him a very successful dictator.
	Almost miraculously he drilled the Italian nation into efficiency.
	At the same time, with great emotional effect and incredible lack of humour he trumpeted Italy’s self-importance, and her will to “expand.”
	And since Italians were slow to learn the necessity of restricting their population, “expansion” was a real need.
</p>
<p>
	Thus it came about that Italy, hungry for French territory in Africa, jealous of French leadership of the Latin races, indignant at the protection afforded to Italian “traitors” in France, became increasingly prone to quarrel with the most assertive of her late allies.
	It was a frontier incident, a fancied “insult to the Italian flag,” which at last caused an unauthorized raid upon French territory by a small party of Italian militia.
	The raiders were captured, but French blood was shed.
	The consequent demand for apology and reparation was calm, but subtly offensive to Italian dignity.
	Italian patriots worked themselves into short-sighted fury.
	The Dictator, far from daring to apologize, was forced to require the release of the captive militia-men, and finally to declare war.
	After a single sharp engagement the relentless armies of France pressed into North Italy.
	Resistance, at first heroic, soon became chaotic.
	In consternation the Italians woke from their dream of military glory.
	The populace turned against the Dictator whom they themselves had forced to declare war.
	In a theatrical but gallant attempt to dominate the Roman mob, he failed, and was killed.
	The new government made a hasty peace, ceding to France a frontier territory which she had already annexed for “security.”
</p>
<p>
	Thenceforth Italians were less concerned to outshine the glory of Garibaldi than to emulate the greater glory of Dante, Giotto and Galileo.
</p>
<p>
	France had now complete mastery of the continent of Europe; but having much to lose, she behaved arrogantly and nervously.
	It was not long before peace was once more disturbed.
</p>
<p>
	Scarcely had the last veterans of the European War ceased from wearying their juniors with reminiscence, when the long rivalry between France and England culminated in a dispute between their respective Governments over a case of sexual outrage said to have been committed by a French African soldier upon an Englishwoman.
	In this quarrel, the British Government happened to be definitely in the wrong, and was probably confused by its own sexual repressions.
	The outrage had never been committed.
	The facts which gave rise to the rumour were, that an idle and neurotic Englishwoman in the south of France, craving the embraces of a “cave man,” had seduced a Senegalese corporal in her own apartments.
	When, later, he had shown signs of boredom, she took revenge by declaring that he had attacked her indecently in the woods above the town.
	This rumour was such that the English were all too prone to savour and believe.
	At the same time, the magnates of the English Press could not resist this opportunity of trading upon the public’s sexuality, tribalism and self-righteousness.
	There followed an epidemic of abuse, and occasional violence, against French subjects in England; and thus the party of fear and militarism in France was given the opportunity it had long sought.
	For the real cause of this war was connected with air power.
	France had persuaded the League of Nations (in one of its less intelligent moments) to restrict the size of military aeroplanes in such a manner that, while London lay within easy striking distance of the French coast, Paris could only with difficulty be touched by England.
	This state of affairs obviously could not last long.
	Britain was agitating more and more insistently for the removal of the restriction.
	On the other hand, there was an increasing demand for complete aerial disarmament in Europe; and so strong was the party of sanity in France, that the scheme would almost certainly have been accepted by the French Government.
	On both counts, therefore, the militarists of France were eager to strike while yet there was opportunity.
</p>
<p>
	In an instant, the whole fruit of this effort for disarmament was destroyed.
	That subtle difference of mentality which had ever made it impossible for these two nations to understand one another, was suddenly exaggerated by this provocative incident into an apparently insoluble discord.
	England reverted to her conviction that all Frenchmen were sensualists, while to France the English appeared, as often before, the most offensive of hypocrites.
	In vain did the saner minds in each country insist on the fundamental humanity of both.
	In vain did the chastened Germans seek to mediate.
	In vain did the League, which by now had very great prestige and authority, threaten both parties with expulsion, even with chastisement.
	Rumour got about in Paris that England, breaking all her international pledges, was now feverishly building giant planes which would wreck France from Calais to Marseilles.
	And indeed the rumour was not wholly a slander, for when the struggle began, the British air force was found to have a range of intensive action far wider than was expected.
	Yet the actual outbreak of war took England by surprise.
	While the London papers were selling out upon the news that war was declared, enemy planes appeared over the city.
	In a couple of hours a third of London was in ruins, and half her population lay poisoned in the streets.
	One bomb, falling beside the British Museum, turned the whole of Bloomsbury into a crater, wherein fragments of mummies, statues, and manuscripts were mingled with the contents of shops, and morsels of salesmen and the intelligentsia.
	Thus in a moment was destroyed a large proportion of England’s most precious relics and most fertile brains.
</p>
<p>
	Then occurred one of those microscopic, yet supremely potent incidents which sometimes mould the course of events for centuries.
	During the bombardment a special meeting of the British Cabinet was held in a cellar in Downing Street.
	The party in power at the time was progressive, mildly pacifist, and timorously cosmopolitan.
	It had got itself involved in the French quarrel quite unintentionally.
	At this Cabinet meeting an idealistic member urged upon his colleagues the need for a supreme gesture of heroism and generosity on the part of Britain.
	Raising his voice with difficulty above the bark of English guns and the volcanic crash of French bombs, he suggested sending by radio the following message: “From the people of England to the people of France.
	Catastrophe has fallen on us at your hands.
	In this hour of agony, all hate and anger have left us.
	Our eyes are opened.
	No longer can we think of ourselves as English merely, and you as merely French; all of us are, before all else, civilized beings.
	Do not imagine that we are defeated, and that this message is a cry for mercy.
	Our armament is intact, and our resources still very great.
	Yet, because of the revelation which has come to us today, we will not fight.
	No plane, no ship, no soldier of Britain shall commit any further act of hostility.
	Do what you will.
	It would be better even that a great people should be destroyed than that the whole race should be thrown into turmoil.
	But you will not strike again.
	As our own eyes have been opened by agony, yours now will be opened by our act of brotherhood.
	The spirit of France and the spirit of England differ.
	They differ deeply; but only as the eye differs from the hand.
	Without you, we should be barbarians.
	And without us, even the bright spirit of France would be but half expressed.
	For the spirit of France lives again in our culture and in our very speech; and the spirit of England is that which strikes from you your most distinctive brilliance.”
</p>
<p>
	At no earlier stage of man’s history could such a message have been considered seriously by any government.
	Had it been suggested during the previous war, its author would have been ridiculed, execrated, perhaps even murdered.
	But since those days, much had happened.
	Increased communication, increased cultural intercourse, and a prolonged vigorous campaign for cosmopolitanism, had changed the mentality of Europe.
	Even so, when, after a brief discussion, the Government ordered this unique message to be sent, its members were awed by their own act.
	As one of them expressed it, they were uncertain whether it was the devil or the deity that had possessed them, but possessed they certainly were.
</p>
<p>
	That night the people of London (those who were left) experienced an exaltation of spirit.
	Disorganization of the city’s life, overwhelming physical suffering and compassion, the consciousness of an unprecedented spiritual act in which each individual felt himself to have somehow participated – these influences combined to produce, even in the bustle and confusion of a wrecked metropolis, a certain restrained fervour, and a deep peace of mind, wholly unfamiliar to Londoners.
</p>
<p>
	Meanwhile the undamaged North knew not whether to regard the Government’s sudden pacificism as a piece of cowardice or as a superbly courageous gesture.
	Very soon, however, they began to make a virtue of necessity, and incline to the latter view.
	Paris itself was divided by the message into a vocal party of triumph and a silent party of bewilderment.
	But as the hours advanced, and the former urged a policy of aggression, the latter found voice for the cry, “<i lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Viva l’Angleterre, viva l’humanité.</i>” And so strong by now was the will for cosmopolitanism that the upshot would almost certainly have been a triumph of sanity, had there not occurred in England an accident which tilted the whole precarious course of events in the opposite direction.
</p>
<p>
	The bombardment had occurred on a Friday night.
	On Saturday the repercussions of England’s great message were echoing throughout the nations.
	That evening, as a wet and foggy day was achieving its pallid sunset, a French plane was seen over the western outskirts of London.
	It gradually descended, and was regarded by onlookers as a messenger of peace.
	Lower and lower it came.
	Something was seen to part from it and fall.
	In a few seconds an immense explosion occurred in the neighbourhood of a great school and a royal palace.
	There was hideous destruction in the school.
	The palace escaped.
	But, chief disaster for the cause of peace, a beautiful and extravagantly popular young princess was caught by the explosion.
	Her body, obscenely mutilated, but still recognizable to every student of the illustrated papers, was impaled upon some high park-railings beside the main thoroughfare toward the city.
	Immediately after the explosion the enemy plane crashed, burst into flame, and was destroyed with its occupants.
</p>
<p>
	A moment’s cool thinking would have convinced all onlookers that this disaster was an accident, that the plane was a belated straggler in distress, and no messenger of hate.
	But, confronted with the mangled bodies of schoolboys, and harrowed by cries of agony and terror, the populace was in no state for ratiocination.
	Moreover there was the princess, an overwhelmingly potent sexual symbol and emblem of tribalism, slaughtered and exposed before the eyes of her adorers.
</p>
<p>
	The news was flashed over the country, and distorted of course in such a manner as to admit no doubt that this act was the crowning deviltry of sexual fiends beyond the Channel.
	In an hour the mood of London was changed, and the whole population of England succumbed to a paroxysm of primitive hate far more extravagant than any that had occurred even in the war against Germany.
	The British air force, all too well equipped and prepared, was ordered to Paris.
</p>
<p>
	Meanwhile in France the militaristic government had fallen, and the party of peace was now in control.
	While the streets were still thronged by its vociferous supporters, the first bomb fell.
	By Monday morning Paris was obliterated.
	There followed a few days of strife between the opposing armaments, and of butchery committed upon the civilian populations.
	In spite of French gallantry, the superior organization, mechanical efficiency, and more cautious courage of the British Air Force soon made it impossible for a French plane to leave the ground.
	But if France was broken, England was too crippled to pursue her advantage.
	Every city of the two countries was completely disorganized.
	Famine, riot, looting, and above all the rapidly accelerating and quite uncontrollable spread of disease, disintegrated both States, and brought war to a standstill.
</p>
<p>
	Indeed, not only did hostilities cease, but also both nations were too shattered even to continue hating one another.
	The energies of each were for a while wholly occupied in trying to prevent complete annihilation by famine and pestilence.
	In the work of reconstruction they had to depend very largely on help from outside.
	The management of each country was taken over, for the time, by the League of Nations.
</p>
<p>
	It is significant to compare the mood of Europe at this time with that which followed the European War.
	Formerly, though there had been a real effort toward unity, hate and suspicion continued to find expression in national policies.
	There was much wrangling about indemnities, reparations, securities; and the division of the whole continent into two hostile camps persisted, though by then it was purely artificial and sentimental.
	But after the Anglo–French war, a very different mood prevailed.
	There was no mention of reparations, no possibility of seeking security by alliances.
	Patriotism simply faded out, for the time, under the influence of extreme disaster.
	The two enemy peoples cooperated with the League in the work of reconstructing not only each one itself, but each one the other.
	This change of heart was due partly to the temporary collapse of the whole national organization, partly to the speedy dominance of each nation by pacifist and anti-nationalist Labour, partly to the fact that the League was powerful enough to inquire into and publish the whole story of the origins of the war, and expose each combatant to itself and to the world in a sorry light.
</p>
<p>
	We have now observed in some detail the incident which stands out in man’s history as perhaps the most dramatic example of petty cause and mighty effect.
	For consider.
	Through some miscalculation, or a mere defect in his instruments, a French airman went astray, and came to grief in London after the sending of the peace message.
	Had this not happened, England and France would not have been wrecked.
	And, had the war been nipped at the outset, as it almost was, the party of sanity throughout the world would have been very greatly strengthened; the precarious will to unity would have gained the conviction which it lacked, would have dominated man not merely during the terrified revulsion after each spasm of national strife, but as a permanent policy based on mutual trust.
	Indeed so delicately balanced were man’s primitive and developed impulses at this time, that but for this trivial accident, the movement which was started by England’s peace message might have proceeded steadily and rapidly toward the unification of the race.
	It might, that is, have attained its goal, before, instead of after, the period of mental deterioration, which in fact resulted from a long epidemic of wars.
	And so the first Dark Age might never have occurred.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
