<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅩⅤ–1: Introduction to the Last Human Species • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-15-1" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 1<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">Introduction to the Last Human Species</span>
</h3>
<p>
	<span class="first-words">If</span> one of the First Men could enter the world of the Last Men, he would find many things familiar and much that would seem strangely distorted and perverse.
	But nearly everything that is most distinctive of the last human species would escape him.
	Unless he were to be told that behind all the obvious and imposing features of civilization, behind all the social organization and personal intercourse of a great community, lay a whole other world of spiritual culture, round about him, yet beyond his ken, he would no more suspect its existence than a cat in London suspects the existence of finance or literature.
</p>
<p>
	Among the familiar things that he would encounter would be creatures recognizably human yet in his view grotesque.
	While he himself laboured under the weight of his own body, these giants would be easily striding.
	He would consider them very sturdy, often thick-set, folk, but he would be compelled to allow them grace of movement and even beauty of proportion.
	The longer he stayed with them the more beauty he would see in them, and the less complacently would he regard his own type.
	Some of these fantastic men and women he would find covered with fur, hirsute, or mole-velvet, revealing the underlying muscles.
	Others would display brown, yellow or ruddy skin, and yet others a translucent ash-green, warmed by the under-flowing blood.
	As a species, though we are all human, we are extremely variable in body and mind, so variable that superficially we seem to be not one species but many.
	Some characters, of course, are common to all of us.
	The traveller might perhaps be surprised by the large yet sensitive hands which are universal, both in men and women.
	In all of us the outermost finger bears at its tip three minute organs of manipulation, rather similar to those which were first devised for the Fifth Men, These excrescences would doubtless revolt our visitor.
	The pair of occipital eyes, too, would shock him; so would the upward-looking astronomical eye on the crown, which is peculiar to the Last Men.
	This organ was so cunningly designed that, when fully extended, about a hand-breadth from its bony case, it reveals the heavens in as much detail as your smaller astronomical telescopes.
	Apart from such special features as these, there is nothing definitely novel about us; though every limb, every contour, shows unmistakably that much has happened since the days of the First Men.
	We are both more human and more animal.
	The primitive explorer might be more readily impressed by our animality than our humanity, so much of our humanity would lie beyond his grasp.
	He would perhaps at first regard us as a degraded type.
	He would call us faun-like, and in particular cases, ape-like, bear-like, ox-like, marsupial, or elephantine.
	Yet our general proportions are definitely human in the ancient manner.
	Where gravity is not insurmountable, the erect biped form is bound to be most serviceable to intelligent land animals; and so, after long wanderings, man has returned to his old shape.
	Moreover, if our observer were himself at all sensitive to facial expression, he would come to recognize in every one of our innumerable physiognomic types an indescribable but distinctively human look, the visible sign of that inward and spiritual grace which is not wholly absent from his own species.
	He would perhaps say, “These men that are beasts are surely gods also.”
	He would be reminded of those old Egyptian deities with animal heads.
	But in us the animal and the human interpenetrate in every feature, in every curve of the body, and with infinite variety.
	He would observe us, together with hints of the long-extinct Mongol, Negro, Nordic, and Semetic, many outlandish features and expressions, deriving from the sub-human period on Neptune, or from Venus.
	He would see in every limb unfamiliar contours of muscle, sinew or bone, which were acquired long after the First Men had vanished.
	Besides the familiar eye-colours, he would discover orbs of topaz, emerald, amethyst and ruby, and a thousand varieties of these.
	But in all of us he would see also, if he had discernment, a facial expression and bodily gesture peculiar to our own species, a certain luminous, yet pungent and ironical significance, which we miss almost wholly in the earlier human faces.
</p>
<p>
	The traveller would recognize among us unmistakable sexual features, both of general proportions and special organs.
	But it would take him long to discover that some of the most striking bodily and facial differences were due to differentiation of the two ancient sexes into many sub-sexes.
	Full sexual experience involves for us a complicated relationship between individuals of all these types.
	Of the extremely important sexual groups I shall speak again.
</p>
<p>
	Our visitor would notice, by the way, that though all persons on Neptune go habitually nude, save for a pouch or rucksack, clothing, often brightly coloured, and made of diverse lustrous or homely tissues unknown before our time, is worn for special purposes.
</p>
<p>
	He would notice also, scattered about the green countryside, many buildings, mostly of one story; for there is plenty of room on Neptune even for the million million of the Last Men.
	Here and there, however, we have great architectural pylons, cruciform or star-shaped in section, cloud-piercing, dignifying the invariable planes of Neptune.
	These mightiest of all buildings, which are constructed in adamantine materials formed of artificial atoms, would seem to our visitor geometrical mountains, far taller than any natural mountain could be, even on the smallest planet.
	In many cases the whole fabric is translucent or transparent, so that at night, with internal illumination, it appears as an edifice of light.
	Springing from a base twenty or more miles across, the star-seeking towers attain a height where even Neptune’s atmosphere is somewhat attenuated.
	In their summits work the hosts of our astronomers, the essential eyes through which our community, on her little raft, peers across the ocean.
	Thither also all men and women repair at one time or another to contemplate this galaxy of ours and the unnumbered remoter universes.
	There they perform together those supreme symbolic acts for which I find no adjective in your speech but the debased word “religious.”
	There also they seek the refreshment of mountain air in a world where natural mountains are unknown.
	And on the pinnacles and precipices of these loftiest horns many of us gratify that primeval lust of climbing which was ingrained in man before ever he was man.
	These buildings thus combine the functions of observatory, temple, sanatorium and gymnasium.
	Some of them are almost as old as the species, some are not yet completed.
	They embody, therefore, many styles.
	The traveller would find modes which he would be tempted to call Gothic, Classical, Egyptian, Peruvian, Chinese, or American, besides a thousand architectural ideas unfamiliar to him.
	Each of these buildings was the work of the race as a whole at some stage in its career.
	None of them is a mere local product.
	Every successive culture has expressed itself in one or more of these supreme monuments.
	Once in forty thousand years or so some new architectural glory would be conceived and executed.
	And such is the continuity of our cultures that there has scarcely ever been need to remove the handiwork of the past.
</p>
<p>
	If our visitor happened to be near enough to one of these great pylons, he would see it surrounded by a swarm of midges, which would turn out to be human fliers, wingless, but with outspread arms.
	The stranger might wonder how a large organism could rise from the ground in Neptune’s powerful field of gravity.
	Yet flight is our ordinary means of locomotion.
	A man has but to put on a suit of overalls fitted at various points with radiation-generators.
	Ordinary flight thus becomes a kind of aerial swimming.
	Only when very high speed is desired do we make use of closed-in air-boats and liners,
</p>
<p>
	At the feet of the great buildings the flat or undulating country is green, brown, golden, and strewn with houses.
	Our traveller would recognize that much land was under cultivation, and would see many persons at work upon it with tools or machinery.
	Most of our food, indeed, is produced by artificial photo synthesis on the broiling planet Jupiter, where even now that the sun is becoming normal again, no life can exist without powerful refrigeration.
	As far as mere nutrition is concerned, we could do without vegetation; but agriculture and its products have played so great a part in human history that today agricultural operations and vegetable foods are very beneficial to the race psychologically.
	And so it comes about that vegetable matter is in great demand, not only as raw material for innumerable manufactures, but also for table delicacies.
	Green vegetables, fruit, and various alcoholic fruit drinks have come to have the same kind of ritual significance for us as wine has for you.
	Meat also, though not a part of ordinary diet, is eaten on very rare and sacred occasions.
	The cherished wild fauna of the planet contributes its toll to periodic symbolical banquets.
	And whenever a human being has chosen to die, his body is ceremoniously eaten by his friends.
</p>
<p>
	Communication with the food factories of Jupiter and the agricultural polar regions of the less torrid Uranus, as also with the automatic mining stations on the glacial outer planets, is maintained by ether ships, which, travelling much faster than the planets themselves, make the passage to the neighbour worlds in a small fraction of the Neptunian year.
	These vessels, of which the smallest are about a mile in length, may be seen descending on our oceans like ducks, Before they touch the water they cause a prodigious tumult with the downward pressure of their radiation; but once upon the surface, they pass quietly into harbour.
</p>
<p>
	The ether ship is in a manner symbolic of our whole community, so highly organized is it, and so minute in relation to the void which engulfs it.
	The ethereal navigators, because they spend so much of their time in the empty regions, beyond the range of “telepathic” communication and sometimes even of mechanical radio, form mentally a unique class among us.
	They are a hardy, simple, and modest folk.
	And though they embody man’s proud mastery of the ether, they are never tired of reminding land-lubbers, with dour jocularity, that the most daring voyages are confined within one drop of the boundless ocean of space.
</p>
<p>
	Recently an exploration ship returned from a voyage into the outer tracts.
	Half her crew had died.
	The survivors were emaciated, diseased, and mentally unbalanced.
	To a race that thought itself so well established in sanity that nothing could disturb it, the spectacle of these unfortunates was instructive.
	Throughout the voyage, which was the longest ever attempted, they had encountered nothing whatever but two comets, and an occasional meteor.
	Some of the nearer constellations were seen with altered forms.
	One or two stars increased slightly in brightness; and the sun was reduced to being the most brilliant of stars.
	The aloof and changeless presence of the constellations seems to have crazed the voyagers.
	When at last the ship returned and berthed, there was a scene such as is seldom witnessed in our modern world.
	The crew flung open the ports and staggered blubbering into the arms of the crowd.
	It would never have been believed that members of our species could be so far reduced from the self-possession that is normal to us.
	Subsequently these poor human wrecks have shown an irrational phobia of the stars, and of all that is not human.
	They dare not go out at night.
	They live in an extravagant passion for the presence of others.
	And since all others are astronomically minded, they cannot find real companionship.
	They insanely refuse to participate in the mental life of the race upon the plane where all things are seen in their just proportions.
	They cling piteously to the sweets of individual life; and so they are led to curse the immensities.
	They fill their minds with human conceits, and their houses with toys.
	By night they draw the curtains and drown the quiet voice of the stars in revelry.
	But it is a joyless and a haunted revelry, desired less for itself than as a defence against reality.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
