<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-CA" xml:lang="en-CA">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<title>Chapter ⅩⅤ–4: Cosmology • Last and First Men</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="../style/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="subchapter-body">
<section id="subchapter-15-4" class="subchapter">
<h3>
	<span class="label-and-ordinal">Section 4<span class="t">:</span></span>
	<span class="title">Cosmology</span>
</h3>
<p>
	We find ourselves living in a vast and boundless, yet finite, order of spatio-temporal events.
	And each of us, as the racial mind, has learned that there are other such orders, other and incommensurable spheres of events, related to our own neither spatially nor temporally but in another mode of eternal being.
	Of the contents of those alien spheres we know almost nothing but that they are incomprehensible to us, even in our racial mentality.
</p>
<p>
	Within this spatio-temporal sphere of ours we remark what we call the Beginning and what we call the End.
	In the Beginning there came into existence, we know not how, that all-pervading and unimaginably tenuous gas which was the parent of all material and spiritual existence within time’s known span.
	It was in fact a very multitudinous yet precisely numbered host.
	From the crowding together of this great population into many swarms, arose in time the nebulæ, each of which in its turn condenses as a galaxy, a universe of stars.
	The stars have their beginnings and their ends; and for a few moments somewhere in between their beginnings and their ends a few, very few, may support mind.
	But in due course will come the universal End, when all the wreckage of the galaxies will have drifted together as a single, barren, and seemingly changeless ash, in the midst of a chaos of unavailing energy.
</p>
<p>
	But the cosmic events which we call the Beginning and the End are final only in relation to our ignorance of the events which lie beyond them.
	We know, and as the racial mind we have apprehended as a clear necessity, that not only space but time also is boundless, though finite.
	For in a sense time is cyclic.
	After the End, events unknowable will continue to happen during a period much longer than that which will have passed since the Beginning; but at length there will recur the identical event which was itself also the Beginning.
</p>
<p>
	Yet though time is cyclic, it is not repetitive; there is no other time within which it can repeat itself.
	For time is but an abstraction from the successiveness of events that pass; and since all events whatsoever form together a cycle of successiveness, there is nothing constant in relation to which there can be repetition.
	And so the succession of events is cyclic, yet not repetitive.
	The birth of the all-pervading gas in the so-called Beginning is not merely <em>similar</em> to another such birth to occur long after us and long after the cosmic End, so-called; the past Beginning <em>is</em> the future Beginning.
</p>
<p>
	From the Beginning to the End is but the span from one spoke to the next on time’s great wheel.
	There is a vaster span, stretching beyond the End and round to the Beginning.
	Of the events therein we know nothing, save that there must be such events.
</p>
<p>
	Everywhere within time’s cycle there is endless passage of events.
	In a continuous flux, they occur and vanish, yielding to their successors.
	Yet each one of then’s is eternal.
	Though passage is of their very nature, and without passage they are nothing, yet they have eternal being.
	But their passage is no illusion.
	They have eternal being, yet eternally they exist with passage.
	In our racial mode we see clearly that this is so; but in our individual mode it remains a mystery.
	Yet even in our individual mode we must accept both sides of this mysterious antinomy, as a fiction needed for the rationalizing of our experience.
</p>
<p>
	The Beginning precedes the End by some hundred million million terrestrial years, and succeeds it by a period at least nine times longer.
	In the middle of the smaller span lies the still shorter period within which alone the living worlds can occur.
	And they are very few.
	One by one they dawn into mentality and die, successive blooms in life’s short summer.
	Before that season and after it, even to the Beginning and to the End, and even before the Beginning and after the End, sleep, utter oblivion.
	Not before there are stars, and not after the stars are chilled, can there be life.
	And then, rarely.
</p>
<p>
	In our own galaxy there have occurred hitherto some twenty thousand worlds that have conceived life.
	And of these a few score have attained or surpassed the mentality of the First Men.
	But of those that have reached this development, man has now outstripped the rest, and today man alone survives.
</p>
<p>
	There are the millions of other galaxies, for instance the Andromedan island.
	We have some reason to surmise that in that favoured universe mind may have attained to insight and power incomparably greater than our own.
	But all that we know for certain is that it contains four worlds of high order.
</p>
<p>
	Of the host of other universes that lie within range of our mind-detecting instruments, none have produced anything comparable with man.
	But there are many universes too remote to be estimated.
</p>
<p>
	You may wonder how we have come to detect these remote lives and intelligences.
	I can say only that the occurrence of mentality produces certain minute astronomical effects, to which our instruments are sensitive even at great distances.
	These effects increase slightly with the mere mass of living matter on any astronomical body, but far more with its mental and spiritual development.
	Long ago it was the spiritual development of the world-community of the Fifth Men that dragged the moon from its orbit.
	And in our own case, so numerous is our society today, and so greatly developed in mental and spiritual activities, that only by continuous expense of physical energy can we preserve the solar system from confusion.
</p>
<p>
	We have another means of detecting minds remote from us in space.
	We can, of course, enter into past minds wherever they are, so long as they are intelligible to us; and we have tried to use this power for the discovery of remote minded worlds.
	But in general the experience of such minds is too different in fibre from our own for us to be able even to detect its existence.
	And so our knowledge of minds in other worlds is almost wholly derived from their physical effects.
</p>
<p>
	We cannot say that nowhere save on those rare bodies called planets does life ever occur.
	For we have evidence that in a few of the younger stars there is life, and even intelligence.
	How it persists in an incandescent environment we know not, nor whether it is perhaps the life of the star as a whole, as a single organism, or the life of many flame-like inhabitants of the star.
	All that we know is that no star in its prime has life, and therefore that the lives of the younger ones are probably doomed.
</p>
<p>
	Again, we know that mind occurs, though very seldom, on a few extremely old stars, no longer incandescent.
	What the future of these minds will be, we cannot tell.
	Perhaps it is with them, and not with man, that the hope of the cosmos lies.
	But at present they are all primitive.
</p>
<p>
	Today nothing anywhere in this galaxy of ours can compare with man in respect of vision and mental creativeness.
</p>
<p>
	We have, therefore, come to regard our community as of some importance.
	Especially so in the light of our metaphysics; but I can only hint at our metaphysical vision of things by means of metaphors which will convey at best a caricature of that vision.
</p>
<p>
	In the Beginning there was great potency, but little form.
	And the spirit slept as the multitude of discrete primordial existents.
	Thenceforth there has been a long and fluctuating adventure toward harmonious complexity of form, and toward the awakening of the spirit into unity, knowledge, delight and self-expression.
	And this is the goal of all living, that the cosmos may be known, and admired, and that it may be crowned with further beauties.
	Nowhere and at no time, so far as we can tell, at least within our own galaxy, has the adventure reached further than in ourselves.
	And in us, what has been achieved is but a minute beginning.
	But it is a real beginning.
	Man in our day has gained some depth of insight, some breadth of knowledge, some power of creation, some faculty of worship.
	We have looked far afield.
	We have probed not altogether superficially into the nature of existence, and have found it very beautiful, though also terrible.
	We have created a not inconsiderable community; and we have wakened together to be the unique spirit of that community.
	We had proposed to ourselves a very long and arduous future, which should culminate, at some time before the End, in the complete achievement of the spirit’s ideal.
	But now we know that disaster is already near at hand.
</p>
<p>
	When we are in full possession of our faculties, we are not distressed by this fate.
	For we know that though our fair community must cease, it has also indestructible being.
	We have at least carved into one region of the eternal real a form which has beauty of no mean order.
	The great company of diverse and most lovely men and women in all their subtle relationships, striving with a single purpose toward the goal which is mind’s final goal; the community and superindividuality of that great host; the beginnings of further insight and creativeness upon the higher plane – these surely are real achievements – even though, in the larger view, they are minute achievements.
</p>
<p>
	Yet though we are not at all dismayed by our own extinction, we cannot but wonder whether or not in the far future some other spirit will fulfil the cosmic ideal, or whether we ourselves are the modest crown of existence.
	Unfortunately, though we can explore the past wherever there are intelligible minds, we cannot enter into the future.
	And so in vain we ask, will ever any spirit awake to gather all spirits into itself, to elicit from the stars their full flower of beauty, to know all things together, and admire all things justly?
</p>
<p>
	If in the far future this end will be achieved, it is really achieved even now; for whenever it occurs, its being is eternal.
	But on the other hand if it is indeed achieved eternally, this achievement must be the work of spirits or a spirit not wholly unlike ourselves, though infinitely greater.
	And the physical location of that spirit must lie in the far future.
</p>
<p>
	But if no future spirit will achieve this end before it dies, then, though the cosmos is indeed very beautiful, it is not perfect.
</p>
<p>
	I said that we regard the cosmos as very beautiful.
	Yet it is also very terrible.
	For ourselves, it is easy to look forward with equanimity to our end, and even to the end of our admired community; for what we prize most is the excellent beauty of the cosmos.
	But there are the myriads of spirits who have never entered into that vision.
	They have suffered, and they were not permitted that consolation.
	There are, first, the incalculable hosts of lowly creatures scattered over all the ages in all the minded worlds.
	Theirs was only a dream life, and their misery not often poignant; but none the less they are to be pitied for having missed the more poignant experience in which alone spirit can find fulfilment.
	Then there are the intelligent beings, human and otherwise; the many minded worlds throughout the galaxies, that have struggled into cognizance, striven for they knew not what, tasted brief delights and lived in the shadow of pain and death, until at last their life has been crushed out by careless fate.
	In our solar system there are the Martians, insanely and miserably obsessed; the native Venerians, imprisoned in their ocean and murdered for man’s sake; and all the hosts of the forerunning human species.
	A few individuals no doubt in every period, and many in certain favoured races, have lived on the whole happily.
	And a few have even known something of the supreme beatitude.
	But for most, until our modern epoch, thwarting has outweighed fulfilment; and if actual grief has not preponderated over joy, it is because, mercifully, the fulfilment that is wholly missed cannot be conceived.
</p>
<p>
	Our predecessors of the Sixteenth species, oppressed by this vast horror, undertook a forlorn and seemingly irrational crusade for the rescue of the tragic past.
	We see now clearly that their enterprise, though desperate, was not quite fantastic.
	For, if ever the cosmic ideal should be realized, even though for a moment only, then in that time the awakened Soul of All will embrace within itself all spirits whatever throughout the whole of time’s wide circuit.
	And so to each one of them, even to the least, it will seem that he has awakened and discovered himself to be the Soul of All, knowing all things and rejoicing in all things.
	And though afterwards, through the inevitable decay of the stars, this most glorious vision must be lost, suddenly or in the long-drawn-out defeat of life, yet would the awakened Soul of All have eternal being, and in it each martyred spirit would have beatitude eternally, though unknown to itself in its own temporal mode.
</p>
<p>
	It may be that this is the case.
	If not, then eternally the martyred spirits are martyred only, and not blest.
</p>
<p>
	We cannot tell which of these possibilities is fact.
	As individuals we earnestly desire that the eternal being of things may include this supreme awakening.
	This, nothing less than this, has been the remote but everpresent goal of our practical religious life and of our social policy.
</p>
<p>
	In our racial mode also we have greatly desired this end, but differently.
</p>
<p>
	Even as individuals, all our desires are tempered by that relentless admiration of fate which we recognize as the spirit’s highest achievement.
	Even as individuals, we exult in the issue whether our enterprises succeed or fail.
	The pioneer defeated, the lover bereaved and overwhelmed, can find in his disaster the supreme experience, the dispassionate ecstasy which salutes the Real as it is and would not change one jot of it.
	Even as individuals, we can regard the impending extinction of mankind as a thing superb though tragic.
	Strong in the knowledge that the human spirit has already inscribed the cosmos with indestructible beauty, and that inevitably, whether sooner or later, man’s career must end, we face this too sudden end with laughter in our hearts, and peace.
</p>
<p>
	But there is the one thought by which, in our individual state, we are still dismayed, namely that the cosmos enterprise itself may fail; that the full potentiality of the Real may never find expression; that never, in any stage of time, the multitudinous and conflicting existents should be organized as the universal harmonious living body; that the spirit’s eternal nature, therefore, should be discordant, miserably tranced; that the inde structible beauties of this our sphere of space and time should remain imperfect, and remain, too, not adequately worshipped.
</p>
<p>
	But in the racial mind this ultimate dread has no place.
	On those few occasions when we have awakened racially, we have come to regard with piety even the possibility of cosmical defeat.
	For as the racial mind, though in a manner we earnestly desired the fulfilment of the cosmical ideal, yet we were no more enslaved to this desire than, as individuals, we are enslaved to our private desires.
	For though the racial mind wills this supreme achievement, yet in the same act it holds itself aloof from it, and from all desire, and all emotion, save the ecstasy which admires the Real as it is, and accepts its dark-bright form with joy.
</p>
<p>
	As individuals, therefore, we try to regard the whole cosmic adventure as a symphony now in progress, which may or may not some day achieve its just conclusion.
	Like music, however, the vast biography of the stars is to be judged not in respect of its final moment merely, but in respect of the perfection of its whole form; and whether its form as a whole is perfect or not, we cannot know.
	Actual music is a pattern of intertwining themes which evolve and die; and these again are woven of simpler members, which again are spun of chords and unitary tones.
	But the music of the spheres is of a complexity almost infinitely more subtle, and its themes rank above and below one another in hierarchy beyond hierarchy.
	None but a God, none but a mind subtle as the music itself, could hear the whole in all its detail, and grasp in one act its close-knit individuality, if such it has.
	Not for any human mind to say authoritatively, “This is music, wholly,” or to say, “This is mere noise, flecked now and then by shreds of significance.”
</p>
<p>
	The music of the spheres is unlike other music not only in respect of its richness, but also in the nature of its medium.
	It is a music not merely of sounds but of souls.
	Each of its minor themes, each of its chords, each single tone of it, each tremor of each tone, is in its own degree more than a mere passive factor in the music; it is a listener, and also a creator.
	Wherever there is individuality of form, there is also an individual appreciator and originator.
	And the more complex the form, the more percipient and active the spirit.
	Thus in every individual factor within the music, the musical environment of that factor is experienced, vaguely or precisely, erroneously, or with greater approximation to truth; and, being experienced, it is admired or loathed, rightly or falsely.
	And it is influenced.
	Just as in actual music each theme is in a manner a determination of its forerunners and followers and present accompaniment, so in this vaster music each individual factor is itself a determination of its environment.
	Also it is a determinant, both of that which precedes and that which follows.
</p>
<p>
	But whether these manifold interdeterminations are after all haphazard, or, as in music, controlled in relation to the beauty of the whole, we know not; nor whether, if this is the case, the beautiful whole of things is the work of some mind; nor yet whether some mind admires it adequately as a whole of beauty.
</p>
<p>
	But this we know: that we ourselves, when the spirit is most awake in us, admire the Real as it is revealed to us, and salute its dark-bright form with joy.
</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
